{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2636
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww15360\viewh9600\viewkind0
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs36 \cf0 \
This book, or really a collection of texts, on the science of Global Warming is probably fundamentally different than anything you\'92ve read before. It interweaves a reader-interactive interface within the texts that helps you to remember what you read. Think of it as a book with an embedded, sophisticated flash-card system(cite Orbit) that can guarantee you will remember what you read permanently. \
\
How does this work? Let me explain\'85\
\
The way that nearly all people read books is broken. It amounts to a spectacular waste of time because we forget what we read, almost immediately. The first psychologist to study this forgetting effect empirically was Hermann Ebbinghaus, who ran a series of memory tests on himself in the 1880s. (Ebbinghaus H (1880) Urmanuskript "Ueber das Ged\'e4chtni\'df". Passau: Passavia Universit\'e4tsverlag. Ebbinghaus H (1885) \'dcber das Ged\'e4chtnis. Leipzig: Dunker.) His results can be summarized with this figure:\
\
Ebbinghaus forgetting curve\
\
You can see in the figure that after initially learning some facts or ideas, within 20 minutes of learning them, we already have forgotten nearly half of them. Within a few days, we will forget nearly 75% of them, and given several months we will have forgotten nearly everything as the curve approaches zero. This \'91Ebbinghaus forgetting curve\'92 has been replicated by other scientists many times over the past century. \
\
In some ways this forgetting curve represents a best-case scenario because it is for a focused learning situation, with easily understood pieces of information. When we read a book that we only partially understand and in unfocused conditions, this curve is too optimistic and we remember even less. So what are we to do about this?\
\
One option would be to follow the approach of the inventors of the book: institute a cycle of re-readings. The ancient world in which books were invented was radically different than our own. Books were extremely rare and spectacularly expensive. Ancient peoples also understood the fallibility of our memories. So books were not simply read once and put down, but rather read over and over again, in cycles of re-reading. This approach is still maintained in many religious communities, where sacred texts are read in an annual (or other) cycle of scheduled re-readings. This meant that while people who lived prior to the invention of the printing press may have read (or more likely <em>heard</em> read out loud to them) at most only a few books, they knew them very well.\
\
While we could follow this re-reading approach, it turns out that there is a far more efficient way to remember what we read and learn.(much of the text that follows is closely based on Michael Nielsen\'92s explication in Quantum Country) For more than a century, cognitive scientists have studied human memory. And they\'92ve figured out some simple strategies that can ensure that we will remember something permanently. The single most important of these ideas is to re-test us on our knowledge, with expanding time intervals between tests.\
\
As an example, consider the question: \'91In Earth\'92s atmosphere, what is the strongest greenhouse gas?\'92 If you are tested on this question and get it right (\'91Water vapor\'92), you\'92d ideally be tested again in a few days. And if you got it right again, you\'92d be tested again a few weeks after that. And so on, following a gradually expanding schedule. If you get the question wrong on one of those tests, the schedule would contract, so you can relearn the answer.\
\
It turns out that such an expanding schedule is the optimal way to retain information because it exactly counteracts the Ebbinghaus forgetting curve. Each time you\'92re re-tested, your brain consolidates the answer a little better into long-term memory, until eventually it\'92s permanent.\
\
Spaced-repetition testing is a simple idea, but has profound consequences. <em>First, it doesn\'92t take much overall time.</em> Because of the expanding test schedule, it typically only takes a few minutes of total review time to memorize the answer to a question for years or decades. I won\'92t go through the math showing that, but you can see it worked out elsewhere.\
http://augmentingcognition.com/ltm.html#Anki_analysis\
\
<em>Second, spaced-repetition testing gives you a guarantee that you will remember the answer to the question.</em> For the most part our memories work in a haphazard manner. We read or hear something interesting and hope that we remember it in the future. Spaced-repetition testing makes memory into a choice.\
\
These facts are truly incredible news and are worth repeating: <em>you can guarantee that you will remember any fact for decades for the price of a few minutes of well-timed review practice.</em> Prior to the invention of the computer, a physical spaced-repetition reviewing process required quite a bit of discipline and a well-structured set of index cards and boxes.(See for example, the Lietner box.) Fortunately for us, now a computer program can handle all the scheduling. \
\
Which brings us back to this book. It\'92s a collection of texts on the science of Global Warming with interleaved quiz-like questions that are based on a spaced-repetition program called Orbit.(cite) The idea is that you will create a free account with Orbit and then read the texts, answering questions as you go along. \
\
Ultimately, this all does come with an additional time cost: you\'92re committing to future question reviews. But consider what that buys you. Each chapter of this book will take you perhaps one or two hours to completely read. In a conventional book, you\'92d forget most of what you learned over the next few weeks, retaining a handful of ideas if you\'92re lucky. But with spaced-repetition testing built into the medium, a small additional commitment of time means you will remember all the core material of the book. Doing this won\'92t be difficult, it will be easier than the initial read. Furthermore, you\'92ll be able to read other material that builds on these ideas; it will open up an entire world.\
\
This spaced-repetition approach is why the questions only require a few seconds to read and answer. They\'92re not complex exercises, in the style of a textbook. Rather, the questions have a different point: the promise each question makes is that you will remember the answer forever. It\'92s to permanently change your thinking.\
\
After you set up an account with Orbit, your review schedule for each question in the book will be tracked, and you\'92ll receive periodic reminders containing a link which takes you to an online review session. That review session isn\'92t the full book. It is just like quickly answering flash-card questions. Each review session contains only the questions that are \'91due\'92, so you can quickly run through them. The time commitment will usually be a few minutes per session, with a little more time early on, when questions need frequent re-testing, but rapidly dropping off after that. You can study on your phone while grabbing coffee, or standing in line, or going for a walk, or in transit. \
\
Here are a couple things to keep in mind about the Orbit questions within the text:\
\
Don\'92t worry about getting questions wrong! You are not graded here for wrong answers. Getting a question wrong helps you to diagnose what you do and don\'92t know. And it\'92s important to use this information to help you fill your knowledge gaps as rapidly as possible.\
\
Some of the questions might appear as though they are repeated, but they are not! What is going on is that many of the cards <em>reverse</em> the content of the original question. Consider the example question we discussed before: \'91In Earth\'92s atmosphere, what is the strongest greenhouse gas?\'92 Answer: \'91Water vapor\'92. When you learn this question you are actually only learning it in <em>one direction</em>. Your brain is learning only a one-way connection between the answer of \'91water vapor\'92 and the question of what is the strongest greenhouse gas. But if you need to know reasons that water vapor is important, you will have a very difficult time coming up with the fact that water vapor is the strongest greenhouse gas.(You may have a hard time believing this, but it\'92s true! http://augmentingcognition.com/ltm.html) This is why in addition to learning the previous question, you will also be prompted with a question like: \'91How important is atmospheric water vapor for the greenhouse effect?\'92 Answer: \'91It is the strongest greenhouse gas\'92. \
\
\
\
}