{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2638
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 IBMPlexSerif-Regular;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww18020\viewh14380\viewkind0
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs36 \cf0 \
\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\partightenfactor0
\cf0 Climate and Weather \
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\partightenfactor0
\cf0 What is the difference between climate and weather? It is intuitively clear what the weather is\'97it is the day-to-day state of the atmosphere at some location, usually with particular reference to such things as temperature, windiness, and precipitation. It is also intuitively clear that when we speak of climate we wish to average out all these day-to-day fluctuations and refer to some kind of average of the weather. But what precisely? There is no ideal definition of climate, but a useful working notion is that climate is the statistics of the weather\'97the mean, the standard deviation, and so forth. But do how we calculate the statistics\'97how do we take the mean, for example? And if climate is a time average of the weather, then how can climate have any temporal variability?\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
Although it is rather fanciful, it is useful to envision a thought experiment in which we take the ensemble average of the weather. Thus, we envision a large number of identical planet Earths, forced the same way, but each one started out in a slightly different way so that each has different weather. We could then unambiguously define the climate to be the average, along with other relevant statistical quantities like the variance, over the ensemble of planet Earths. If the forcing were to change, perhaps because the CO2 levels in the planets were to increase, then the climate of the ensemble would also change.\
\
The problem with this definition is that it is not practical, there is no such ensemble in reality. However, we can try to take our average in such a way that it mimics the ensemble average as closely as possible, and this way of proceeding will be useful to the extent that the weather and climate have different time and space scales. We could then define climate as the average of the weather over a time period long enough so that weather fluctuations are averaged out but variability on longer timescales is still allowed. Weather typically varies on timescales of a few days to a few weeks, so that we might define climate as the average weather over time periods longer than a month, say. In practice, this time period is too short for many purposes because the monthly average temperature still fluctuates considerably, and a more common definition takes the climate to be the average (along with other statistical quantities) over a period of a few years, with the precise averaging period depending on what quantity is of interest. We might choose to take the average over a particular time of year\'97only over the winter months, for example, and so obtain a winter climatology. If we are interested in how climate varies across ice ages, then averaging over a period of centuries or even millennia might be appropriate, but if we are interested in whether climate changed over the course of the twentieth century, a much shorter period is obviously more appropriate.\
\
The moral of the above discussion is that, although it is useful to think of the climate as some kind of average, there is no compact single definition of climate that is useful and appropriate for all purposes, and we are often better served by talking about the climate with reference to a particular timescale. climate varies on more than one timescale\'97indeed, there may be no timescale on which we can say there is no climate variation.\
\
Weekly Variability and the Weather\
\
On daily and weekly timescales, the main mechanism that causes variations in the temperature and wind is simply the familiar weather. The mechanism that gives rise to weather resides in the atmosphere, and it is the consequence of a fluid instability called baroclinic instability. This instability can be thought of as a type of convective instability in which if a fluid is heated from below it expands, becomes lighter than its surroundings, and therefore rises. Baroclinic instability has a similar origin, but it also involves the lateral motion of air, with a typical scale of up to a few thousand kilometers and a typical velocity of about 10 ms-1. It takes a parcel of air moving at this speed a little more than a day to travel 1,000 km, hence accounting for the typical timescale of days to weeks. In midlatitudes, the average temperature difference between two lines of latitude that are 1,000 km apart is about 5\'b0C, and because weather is stirring the air on these spacescales, a typical weather system can lead to typical temperature variations of up to 5\'b0C on timescales of a few days.\
\
Monthly to Seasonal Variability\
\
The cycle of the seasons arises because of the tilt of Earth\'92s axis. As the Earth goes around the Sun, the Northern Hemisphere experiences summer when it points most toward the Sun and it experiences winter when it points most away from the Sun. If Earth were not tilted at all but spun along an axis that was straight up and down, the amount of sunlight would be the same in a given place all year round and therefore there would be no seasons. \
\
If we think of a season as lasting roughly three months, are there any climate phenomena that have timescales between the weather timescale and the seasonal timescale? The answer is, to a degree yes, there is at least one such phenomenon, known as the North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO). The NAO is a phenomenon at the interface between weather and climate that dictates variability on a monthly timescale over the North Atlantic and surrounding regions, thus from the eastern seaboard of the United States, over Greenland, to Europe, and from the Arctic region to the Canaries. Indeed, to some extent the NAO affects the weather and climate over the entire Northern Hemisphere. There is an analogue of the NAO in the Southern Hemisphere (called the Southern Annular Mode), although it has a more hemispheric extent.\
\
So what is the NAO? It may be thought of as a north\'96south oscillation of the main patterns of weather variability over the Atlantic region, especially in the winter, as illustrated below:\
\
FIG 6.1\
\
During the \'91positive phase\'92 of the NAO, the main path of weather systems tracks a little further north than usual. Because the air is coming straight over the ocean, it tends to be relatively warm and so brings warm, wet weather to the United Kingdom and other parts of northern Europe, with precipitation often falling as rain rather than snow in the United Kingdom, with similar effects downstream into eastern Europe and even Asia. Southern Europe and North Africa tend to have somewhat cooler weather than usual during these periods. Meanwhile, stronger northerly and northeasterly winds over Greenland and northeastern Canada bring cold, dry air to these parts, decreasing the temperature, with the eastern parts of the United States getting higher temperatures and more precipitation than normal, rather like northern Europe.\
\
During the \'91negative phase\'92 of the NAO, the storm track swings southward, bringing mild, wet weather to southern Europe. During these periods, northern Europe tends to receive air that has come from the east, which, since it has come from a continental land mass in winter, tends to be very cold, with precipitation often in the form of snow. Greenland, on the other hand, is now somewhat warmer than usual. The signal of the NAO is evidently quite large and coherent and in fact accounts for about one-third of the northern Hemisphere\'92s interannual surface variance during winter.\
\
The distinctive pattern of the NAO, whether positive or negative, tends to last for several days to a few weeks, perhaps a little longer than regular weather patterns, but undoubtedly the main mechanism for the NAO lies in the atmosphere itself. However, there may be a longer timescale to the NAO, as illustrated below:\
\
FIG 6.2\
\
Large changes in the NAO index occur from year to year, and on the whole atmospheric behavior in one winter is largely independent of its behavior the previous winter. (The correlation in the NAO index from one year to another is only about 0.1.) nevertheless, there is some indication that there are certain periods of time when the NAO persists from year to year. For example, from about 1905 to 1915 the NAO index was largely positive. It was negative from about 1950 to 1970, and then unusually positive in the 1980s and 1990s. Among other things, the positive index in the 1980s and 1990s brought higher than usual precipitation to Scandinavia and may have ameliorated the effects of global warming in the retreat of the glaciers. In contrast, over the Alps, a positive NAO index and less than normal precipitation may have worked in conjunction with global warming to cause a significant retreat of the Alpine glaciers. The Iberian peninsula and other areas around the Mediterranean also experienced drought in the late twentieth century.\
\
It is an open question whether such long periods of persistent behavior are much more than the random variations of a chaotic system (rather like throwing six sixes in a row with a die) or whether they have a specific cause, most likely in the ocean. Why is the cause most likely in the ocean? It is because the timescales of the interannual variability correspond most closely to the timescales occurring in large-scale ocean dynamics. The dominant internal dynamics of the atmosphere are most likely too short to produce coherent dynamics that last over decadal timescales, whereas the dynamics of land ice sheets, or of changes in insolation at the top of the atmosphere because of orbital variations, are too long. One possibility is that volcanoes can have a climatic effect on the decadal timescale, but the correlation of the NAO with volcanoes is small. So let us look at the role of the ocean.\
\
EDIT FROM HERE\
\
ocean influence on climate variability\
\
How might the ocean affect climate variability? indeed, might it even effect climate variability? The ocean has one unambiguous influence on midlatitude climate vari- ability and a number of more ambiguous influences. The unambiguous influence stems from the fact that the heat capacity of the ocean is much greater than that of land, as we discussed in chapter 5. Thus, changes in surface tem- peratures over land, especially in locations far from the ocean, are much larger than the changes over the ocean, and so the variations over land tend to dominate any hemisphere-wide measure of the variability. changes in the temperature associated with changes in the NAO pattern from positive to negative are distinctly more marked over land than over the ocean.\
\
The more ambiguous effect concerns the relation- ship between fluctuations in the sea-surface temperature (SSt) and the state of the atmosphere in midlatitudes, and in particular the state of the NAO. certainly, varia- tions in the SSt and the overlying atmosphere are re- lated. to be specific, let us focus on the north Atlantic and the NAO, but similar concerns and effects almost certainly apply to other regions of the world\'92s ocean. it turns out that a common pattern of SSt variability in the north Atlantic winter is a tripole. rather like the NAO itself, the tripole commonly exists in one of two phases. in one phase, the pattern consists of a cold anomaly in the subpolar north Atlantic around Greenland, a warm anomaly in the middle latitudes off the Atlantic seaboard of the United States, and a cold subtropical anomaly be- tween the equator and 30\'b0 n, concentrated most in the eastern Atlantic. is the SSt pattern created by the pat- tern of variability of winds and temperature in the atmo- sphere, or does the SSt pattern determine the variability of the atmospheric winds and temperature? This is the $64,000 question! it may of course be a chicken-and-egg problem, with one pattern leading to the other, which then reinforces the first pattern, and so on. How are we to determine the answer? one way is to see if we can de- termine if variations in the atmosphere unambiguously lead those in the ocean, or vice versa. if it is the former case, then it seems likely that the atmosphere is driving the ocean, rather than vice versa (although of course the reader may be able to come up with perverse counter- examples where this is not the case).\
\
careful observational analysis in fact suggests that the basic pattern of SSt anomalies is created by air\'96sea heat exchanges and the wind-induced near-surface ocean cur- rents associated with the NAO. it seems that the correla- tions between atmosphere and ocean are strongest for atmospheric patterns that exist before the SSt variability by a few weeks, suggesting that large-scale SSt patterns are responding to atmospheric forcing, rather than caus- ing the atmospheric patterns. Put simply, the atmosphere leads the ocean. However, rather intriguingly, that may not be the whole story, although the reader should be warned that the situation is far from settled and is an active topic of research. At still longer timescales, there is some evidence that a large-scale, pan-Atlantic SSt pat- tern actually precedes the atmospheric NAO pattern by up to about six months.1\
\
What is going on? We can explain these apparently differing observations as follows. First of all, let\'92s be clear that we are talking about patterns of variability in both the atmosphere and the ocean. The mean ocean gyres and the meridional overturning circulation are set up, as we discussed in chapter 4, in response to the mean atmospheric circulation. now, as we know, the atmo- sphere varies on timescales of days to a few weeks, and on space scales of a few thousand kilometers, and we call this variability weather. it seems that on timescales from days to a few months, the atmosphere does indeed drive anomalies in the ocean. That is to say, if the atmo- spheric winds and temperature happen to have a certain configuration for a few days, then (depending on that configuration) cold or warm SSt anomalies can be gen- erated, typically also on space scales of a few thousand kilometers. Because of the much larger thermal inertia of the ocean (as well as the fact that the ocean currents are roughly a hundred times smaller than the winds in the atmosphere), these patterns may persist much lon- ger than typical atmospheric patterns. Thus, the ocean smooths away the smaller scale, day-to-day variabil- ity and leaves behind larger scale and more persistent patterns. The ocean is really a passive partner in this activity\'97the origins of patterns of SSt variability on monthly timescales primarily lie in the atmosphere\'97 and in this sense we may say the atmosphere drives the ocean. The persistence of the ocean anomalies does feed back on the atmosphere, leading to somewhat more per- sistent and less extreme weather than might otherwise be the case, so that one might also say the ocean damps the atmosphere. This effect is obviously rather similar to the one we discussed in the previous chapter, where we discussed the generally moderating influence of the ocean on the climate.\
\
However, the ocean does have dynamics of its own. The gyres contain smaller eddies that produce consider- able variability, just as the atmosphere has weather, and the large-scale gyres themselves may vary on interannual to decadal timescales. The meridional overturning cir- culation also varies, and its sluggish nature suggests that the variability may include timescales of decades and longer. if this variability is able to produce large-scale, long-lived SSt anomalies, it is possible that these anom- alies may, over time, affect the average behavior of the atmosphere. even though the impact of mid- and high- latitude SSt anomalies on the atmosphere seems to be small, if the anomalies persist for long enough, they will have a cumulative effect. Such an effect may be respon- sible for the seeming persistence of the NAO pattern in certain decades that we alluded to previously, but the evidence is not definitive.\
\
El Ni\'f1o and the Southern Oscillation\
\
in the next few sections we describe the phenomenon (and what a phenomenon it is!) known as El Ni\'f1o, or sometimes as el ni\'f1o and the Southern oscillation (enSo). The Southern oscillation is the atmospheric part of the phenomenon, and el ni\'f1o, the oceanic com- ponent; enSo is the combination. However, unless we need to be particularly precise, we often just use the term el ni\'f1o, for this has a pleasant euphony lacking in the acronym enSo.2 el ni\'f1o is the largest and most important phenomenon in global climate variability on interannual timescales. in brief, it is an anomalous warming of the surface waters in the eastern equatorial Pacific, most pronounced just off the coast of Peru but extending westward to the dateline.\
\
in the next few sections we describe in a little more detail what el ni\'f1o is, what mechanisms give rise to it, and what effects it has, or is perceived to have, on weather and climate throughout the world.\
\
What is el ni\'f1o?\
\
every few years the temperature of the surface waters in the eastern tropical Pacific rises quite significantly. The strongest warming takes place between about 5\'b0 S and 5\'b0 n, and from the west coast of Peru (a longitude of about 80\'b0 W) almost to the dateline, at 180\'b0 W, as illus- trated in figure 6.3. The warming is significant, with a dif- ference in temperature up to 6\'b0c from an el ni\'f1o year to a non\'96el ni\'f1o year. The warmings occur rather irregu- larly, but typically the interval between warmings ranges from three to seven years, as illustrated in figure 6.4.\
\
The warmings have become known as el ni\'f1o events, or even (with a little violence to the Spanish language) el ni\'f1os. The name derives from the fact that the warm waters off Peru appear at about christmastime, and the name el ni\'f1o is Spanish for the christ child.3 The warm- ings typically last for up to a year, sometimes two, and appear as an enhancement to the seasonal cycle, with high temperatures appearing at a time when the waters are already warming. Although there is no universally agreed-upon definition of an el ni\'f1o, an event is often regarded as having occurred when there is a warming of at least 0.5\'b0c averaged over the eastern tropical Pacific lasting for six months or more.4 rarely can a year be de- scribed as truly normal; rather, the ocean temperatures tend to fluctuate between warm el ni\'f1o years and years in which the equatorial ocean temperatures are colder in the east and warmer in the west, with those years that are particularly anomalous this way having become known as La Ni\'f1a events (la ni\'f1a, without capitalization, is Span- ish for young girl; there is no female equivalent of the christ child, el ni\'f1o in Spanish). We have direct observa- tional evidence\'97that is, compilations of measurements of the sea-surface temperature from ships and buoys\'97of el ni\'f1o events for more than a century, but the events have almost certainly gone on for a much longer time, perhaps millennia or longer. We know this through a variety of proxy records; tree rings provide some of the most detailed information. As we will discuss later on, el ni\'f1o events bring anomalous rainfall and tempera- ture throughout the equatorial Pacific and western north America, affecting the tree-ring characteristics and pro- viding convincing evidence of the occurrence of el ni\'f1o events for the past several hundred years.\
\
corals also provide a good record of el ni\'f1o events because they have skeletal growth bands that, rather like tree rings, provide an accurate annual chronology. The isotopic composition of oxygen contained in the skel- etons responds to both SSt and rainfall, thus providing a record of el ni\'f1o that goes far into the past. indeed, one recent analysis of corals from Papua new Guinea suggests that el ni\'f1o events have occurred for the past 130,000 years\'97that is, even over the last ice age!7\
\
our knowledge of el ni\'f1o seems to have begun with observations of the SSt off the coast of Peru, but it is now understood that the phenomenon itself is Pacific- wide and also involves the atmosphere. observations of the winds and the surface pressure in the equatorial Pacific show that these tend to covary with the SSt. in particular, during el ni\'f1o events the equatorial Pacific trade winds, which normally blow toward the west, be- come much weaker and may even reverse. one useful measure is the pressure difference between Darwin, at the far north of Australia (12\'b0 S, 130\'b0 e), and tahiti (17\'b0 S, 150\'b0 W), an island in the Pacific; the record of this dif- ference is known as the Southern Oscillation. (There is nothing truly special about these locations vis-\'e0-vis el ni\'f1o, but pressure measurements have been made there for a long time.) We see in figure 6.4 that the Southern oscillation and the SSt record of el ni\'f1o are highly correlated.\
\
The mechanism of el ni\'f1o\
\
The mean state of the atmosphere and the ocean\
\
Before discussing what processes conspire to produce el ni\'f1o events, let us discuss what the mean state of the at- mosphere and ocean are, beginning with the atmosphere. The trade winds throughout the equatorial region blow predominantly from higher latitudes toward the equator, and from the east to the west. The low-level convergence at the equator forces the air to rise and then, several ki- lometers above the surface, move poleward, sinking in the subtropics at about 30\'b0 north and south and then moving equatorward at the surface. The meridional cell is known as the Hadley cell, and if there were no conti- nents, the equatorial convergence would be on average the same at all longitudes.\
\
However, there are continents and ocean basins, and their presence is essential in producing el ni\'f1o events. The easterly winds over the equatorial Pacific tend to push the surface waters westward, creating a westward current at the surface. The surface waters also diverge away from the equator because of the coriolis effect, causing upwelling along the equator; that is, cold water from the deep ocean is pulled toward the surface to re- place the surface waters moving away. Upwelling in fact occurs at most longitudes in the Pacific (because the equatorial divergence occurs at all longitudes), but it is particularly important in the east because here it must also replenish the surface waters moving westward away from South America. The upwelling water is cold be- cause it comes from the deep ocean, so that the SSt of the eastern equatorial Pacific is relatively low, and the surface waters become warmer as they move westward. The thermocline deepens further west, and so the up- welling does not bring as much cold abyssal water to the surface. The upshot of all this is that the SSt is high in the western Pacific, up to about 30\'b0c, and low in the eastern Pacific, at about 21\'b0c (figure 6.3, top panel).\
\
As one might expect, such a strong temperature gra- dient in turn affects the atmosphere. The warm western Pacific region becomes much more unstable with respect to convection than the eastern part, so that rising mo- tion preferentially occurs here. The eastern Pacific is cor- respondingly cool and thus prone to descent and so, as illustrated in figure 6.5, an east\'96west overturning circu- lation is set up in the atmosphere. This is known as the Walker circulation after the British meteorologist Gilbert Walker, who described it in the 1920s.8 The Walker cir- culation coexists with and is somewhat analogous to the north\'96south Hadley circulation, in that both are driven by horizontal temperature gradients at the surface.\
\
Variability and El Ni\'f1o\
\
Having described the Walker circulation and the cor- responding ocean circulation, let\'92s see if we can under- stand why they vary and give rise to el ni\'f1o events. We first note that the ocean and the atmosphere tend to rein- force each other: the atmospheric winds naturally blow from east to west, which sets up an east\'96west tempera- ture gradient in the ocean. The warm ocean in the west leads to rising motion in the atmosphere, pulling air in at the surface. Thus, the westward atmospheric winds in the Pacific tend to be stronger than they would be if there were no ocean there at all or if the ocean extended all the way around the globe. Such a reinforcement is known as a positive feedback, and it can work both ways. That is to say, positive feedbacks tend to reinforce tendencies, so that if a system starts moving in a different direction, the feedback may again kick in, reinforcing the initial ten- dency, whatever that tendency may be.\
\
Let\'92s suppose that the Pacific is in a relatively normal state, as illustrated in the top panel of figure 6.5. We now imagine that, for reasons we won\'92t be definitive about right now, the east\'96west temperature contrast weakens somewhat\'97perhaps the eastern Pacific ocean gets a bit warmer than usual because of some fluctuation in the ocean. The atmosphere can be expected to respond to this by a weakening of the trade winds, to which the ocean in turn responds; with weaker trade winds, the upwelling in the east becomes weaker and the thermocline flattens (as in the lower panel of figure 6.5). The temperature in the east consequently rises a little while temperature in the western Pacific falls, so further reducing the east\'96west temperature gradient. This reduced temperature con- trast results in the main convective regions moving fur- ther east and causes the trade winds to further weaken, which in turn further reduces upwelling and causes the temperatures to further increase in the eastern equatorial Pacific; the culmination of this chain of events is an el ni\'f1o. evidently, the sequence of events is crucially depen- dent on the mutual interaction and feedback between the atmosphere and the ocean, as was first posited by Jacob Bjerknes in 1969. (Jacob Bjerknes (1897\'961975) was a nor- wegian climate scientist working in the United States.)\
\
The positive feedback we\'92ve described must come to an end eventually. The ocean temperature in the east cannot rise indefinitely (and in practice much above 30\'b0c) because eventually the ocean cools via radiation and by giving up heat to the atmosphere. Furthermore, the natural tendency of the trade winds is to blow to- ward the west, and this effect tries to restore the natural order of things. once an el ni\'f1o is fully developed, it persists for several months before beginning to decay. At that stage, the feedbacks we described above come into play again, but now working in the opposite direction. indeed, the feedbacks may well cause the sys- tem to overshoot its mean state and go into a La ni\'f1a state, with enhanced warming in the west, cooler than normal conditions in the east, and stronger than usual trade winds. Then, some time after that, the whole pro- cess may begin again and the system may again evolve toward an el ni\'f1o state. The seemingly oscillatory na- ture of the atmospheric cycle historically gave rise to the appellation Southern oscillation, and the entire phenomenon\'97atmosphere plus ocean together\'97is often referred to as the enSo cycle. Although the basic mechanisms of the oscillation are fairly well accepted, the nature and causes of the transition between the el ni\'f1o and La ni\'f1a states, and the need or otherwise for some form of kick start to begin the el ni\'f1o cycle, re- main to be definitely explained.9\
\
consequences and impacts of el ni\'f1o\
\
What are the consequences of el ni\'f1o? There are both local effects, arising because of the warm eastern Pacific, weakened trade winds, and shifted regions of convec- tion, and distant effects, mostly arising because the at- mosphere carries the signal of el ni\'f1o far afield. We\'92ll talk about the local effects first.\
\
Local effects of El Ni\'f1o\
\
el ni\'f1o brings significantly warmer water to the east- ern tropical Pacific, and this water spreads both north and south along the coast, giving a detectable signal in the SSt as far north as california and oregon. There is a direct effect of this change on Pacific marine life: Warm- water species have an extended range of habitat, whereas cold-water species try to move poleward or into deeper water, and the reduced upwelling off the South American coast produces fewer nutrients, fewer fish, and fewer sea- birds that feed off the fish. The shift of fish populations is a problem for the fishing industry, if only because the species tend to move away from established fisheries, and overall there is a loss of commercially important species. Pinnipeds (e.g., fur seals and sea lions) are also affected as far north as california (for example, in the channel islands off Los Angeles) because they may have difficulty finding adequate food supplies. coral bleaching (the whitening of corals because of the loss of or changes in the protozoa living within them) in the Galapagos also occurs in el ni\'f1o years.\
\
The warm ocean also affects the atmosphere above it; the warming is part of the enSo cycle itself. During a warm event, the main convective areas move eastward, and the western parts of South America, especially close to the equator in northern Peru and ecuador, experi- ence significantly more rainfall, especially from Decem- ber to February, when the events typically reach their peak. Significant flooding may occur when the event is a strong one. in contrast, northern Australia and the in- donesian archipelago experience significantly less rain- fall than normal throughout the entire region and for an extended period of time. During a La ni\'f1a, the situation is almost reversed, with warmer and wetter weather in the indonesian archipelago and northern Australia and generally cooler and dryer weather in coastal Peru and ecuador.\
\
Distant effects\
\
By distant effects we mean the effects of el ni\'f1o on other regions of the globe that are not in themselves part of the enSo cycle. Some of these effects are noticeable, especially if the el ni\'f1o event is strong, but others are weak and ambiguous and only emerge after averaging over a number of el ni\'f1o events to remove the natural variability\'97or noise\'97that causes one year to have dif- ferent weather from another in any case. We first note the overall effect: in an el ni\'f1o year, the globally aver- aged surface temperature can be as much as 0.5\'b0c higher than the years before and after, and this increase is ac- counted for by the fact that the surface temperatures in the eastern tropical Pacific can be several degrees higher than normal.\
\
one effect that certainly arises during strong el ni\'f1o events is that the storm track over the eastern north Pa- cific becomes stronger, wetter, and further south in winter, bringing heavy rain to central and southern california and additional snow to the southern Sierras. in both the 1982\'96 83 and 1997\'9698 events, extensive flooding and landslides occurred. in some contrast, further north in oregon the snow pack was less than usual because of a warm winter but no enhanced precipitation, and canada tends to expe- rience warmer and drier winters in el ni\'f1o years. These effects are not nearly as pronounced in years with weaker el ni\'f1o events, and it is often hard to definitively attribute anomalous winter rainfall to an el ni\'f1o event.\
\
The storm track does not end when it reaches califor- nia, and new Mexico, Arizona, and indeed much of the southern United States can receive enhanced precipita- tion in el ni\'f1o years. (indeed, new Mexico has some of the best tree-ring records of el ni\'f1o.) The storm track may pick up again over the Atlantic and bring enhanced precipitation to europe. certainly, there is a correlation between el ni\'f1o events and the phase of the north At- lantic oscillation, with warm events associated with a negative phase of the NAO. elsewhere in the world, the effects are weaker, but there is some evidence that parts of east Africa (particularly Kenya and tanzania) experi- ence wetter weather during warm events.\
\
Finally, we mention another tropical effect, a nonlo- cal one but one that seems to be quite robust. it is that Atlantic hurricanes tend to be suppressed during el ni\'f1o years. Why should this be? Hurricanes form over warm tropical waters, and when the SSt in the Atlantic is anomalously high, then the Atlantic hurricane season is more active than usual. However, hurricanes do not respond to the sea-surface temperature alone. rather, they are a kind of heat engine, and a significant factor in driving hurricanes is the temperature difference between the sea surface and the upper atmosphere. (The effect is analogous to the fact that midlatitude weather systems respond to the temperature gradient between the equa- tor and the poles.) During el ni\'f1o events, the Pacific region becomes particularly warm, and this warmth spreads throughout the tropics in the upper atmosphere, and in particular the upper tropical atmosphere over the Atlantic becomes anomalously warm. Hence, the tem- perature difference between the surface and the upper atmosphere that drives Atlantic hurricanes is reduced, and the Atlantic hurricane season in an el ni\'f1o year tends to be less active than usual.\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
}