{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2638
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 IBMPlexSans-Regular;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww19560\viewh14380\viewkind0
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs36 \cf0 \
\
Forcing and Response\
\
The climate system can be forced by external processes. For example, the Earth\'92s temperature is partly determined by the Sun\'92s energy output. This is a forcing. Changes in forcing are due to changes in the external processes. A change in the brightness of the Sun could produce, as a response, a change in the Earth\'92s temperature. \
\
We can capture this idea mathematically by writing that for a given change in radiative forcing, \\(\\Delta R\\), there will be a change in temperature, \\(\\Delta T\\), such that\
\
\\[\\lambda \\Delta R = \\Delta T \\; ,\\]\
\
where \\(\\lambda\\) is called the climate sensitivity parameter and it determines how strong the temperature response is for a given climate system (it turns out that Earth now, Earth during an ice age, Mars now, etc., all have different climate sensitivity parameters). This equation is a \'91linear\'92 equation and assumes that the change in forcing, \\(\\Delta R\\), is relatively small (the current energy imbalance due to global warming is about 1 \\(\\text\{W\}/\\text\{m\}^2\\), compared to the total energy flux of about 340 \\(\\text\{W\}/\\text\{m\}^2\\)). \
\
This equation works well for a planet with no atmosphere. But what if by changing the solar radiative forcing, the Earth\'92s atmosphere were to respond in some way? What if the atmosphere could counteract or damp the forcing? If the Sun were to put out more energy, perhaps the Earth\'92s atmosphere could change somehow to cool itself down so that it wouldn\'92t warm as much as it might otherwise do without an atmosphere? Alternatively, perhaps it\'92s possible for Earth\'92s atmosphere to amplify the increase in solar radiation, making Earth even hotter than it might otherwise be? These effects are called \'91feedbacks\'92 and they occur widely in many technical fields, and even in daily life. \'91Positive feedbacks\'92 amplify and \'91negative feedbacks\'92 regulate or damp.\
\
A familiar example of a positive feedback is the unpleasant squeal produced by a sound system that includes a microphone, an audio amplifier, and a speaker. A sound picked up by the microphone is amplified and played through the speaker. If the speaker is too close to the microphone or if the gain of the amplifier is turned up too high, the sound produced by the speaker is picked up by the microphone and further amplified, leading to the familiar screeching of audio feedback. Small perturbations are amplified; this is characteristic of a positive feedback.\
\
A familiar example of a negative feedback is temperature control by a thermostat that is coupled to a heating, ventilation, and air conditioning system. After you set a target temperature, the thermostat detects temperature excursions from the target value and commands the system to fight against those excursions by warming when the air is too cool and cooling when the air is too warm. Small perturbations are damped; this is characteristic of negative feedback.\
\
Both positive and negative feedbacks occur in the climate system. Positive feedbacks tend to increase the system\'92s variability, while negative feedbacks reduce it. It is important to distinguish between internal and external processes. For the case of climate feedback, internal processes are those that occur within the climate system itself. Examples include weather systems, ocean circulations, and land-surface processes. External processes are unaffected by the state of the system. As an example, the flow of energy from the Sun is unaffected by the state of the Earth\'92s climate system. There is also a bit of a gray area. For example, human activities are often considered external to the climate system, even though human affairs are strongly affected by climate, and even though humans are now capable of altering the climate. At some level, humanity is a part of the climate system. But for the purposes of feedbacks, human emissions of greenhouse gases are considered \'91external\'92 to the climate system.\
\
\
\
\
\
The equation above also assumes that there are no feedbacks that can respond to the change in temperature, so let\'92s add one in. Adding in a feedback means that some part of the temperature response gets added back into the radiative forcing, so it can increase or reduce the initial forcing (increasing the forcing is a positive feedback, reducing the forcing is a negative feedback). The simplest representation of this small radiative addition is linear, \\(c_1 \\Delta T\\), with the parameter \\(c_1\\). So then we have that \
\
\\[\\Delta T = \\lambda (\\Delta R + c_1 \\Delta T \\; ,\\]\
\
and solving for  \\(\\Delta T\\) we have \
\
\\[\\Delta T = \\frac\{\\lambda \\Delta R\}\{1-c_1\\lambda\} \\; .\\]\
\
This equation is often simplified slightly by introducing the \'91feedback factor\'92 \\(f=c_1\\lambda\\), so that\
\
\\[\\Delta T = \\frac\{\\lambda \\Delta R\}\{1-f\} \\; .\\]\
\
Mathematically, a negative feedback means that \\(f\\) is negative, while a positive feedback means that \\(f\\) is positive. It turns out that if we have several different feedbacks, these can just be added into \\(f\\) (e.g., for three feedbacks \\(f=f_1+f_2+f_3\\)).\
\
(See Roe for more mathematical details and discussion of the derivation of these equations) Roe, \'91Feedbacks, Timescales, and Seeing Red\'92 (2009). Please see this source for further details. We\'92ve \'91forcing\'92\
\
Some of the temperature \'91output\'92 is fed back into the radiative \'91input\'92.\
\
Randall, \'91Atmosphere, Clouds, and Climate\'92, (2011).\
\
It turns out the climate system has several important feedbacks that modify the radiative change of increasing greenhouse gases. Let\'92s look at each of these in turn.\
\
The Snow and Ice Albedo Feedback\
\
We\'92ll begin with what is called the snow and ice albedo feedback, or sometimes simply the \'91albedo feedback\'92. This climate feedback is not a big feedback, but it\'92s fairly simple, so we\'92ll use it as an introductory example.\
\
In a warmer climate, snow and ice cover are expected to decrease globally. The dependence of snow and ice cover on surface temperature is the first essential part of the snow and ice albedo feedback. A second essential part is that snow and ice absorb less solar radiation than the darker surfaces that they cover up. When dark soil or rock emerges from beneath white snow or a retreating glacier, or when the dark ocean emerges from beneath the white, sometimes snow-covered sea ice, more solar radiation is absorbed by the newly darkened surface. We therefore expect the albedo to decrease as the surface temperature increases. The reduced albedo leads to an increase in the absorption of solar radiation. The added solar energy causes warming, which, in turn, can cause even more melting. This is a \'91positive feedback loop\'92, as depicted below.\
\
FIG: ice albedo feedback\
\
The positive snow and ice albedo feedback can amplify a cooling, as well as a warming. If the climate cools, the resulting increased snow and ice cover reflects more sunlight back to space, and the cooling is amplified. <i>Note that both positive and negative feedbacks can cause either warming or cooling; their role is to amplify or damp a temperature change.</i>\
\
\
The Water Vapor Feedback\
\
The positive water vapor feedback is the most important atmospheric feedback in the climate system. Its existence was recognized over a century ago by Svante Arrhenius in the 1890s, though it took until the late 1960s and the first computer-based climate modeling work to understand its full significance. \
\
The water vapor feedback is fundamentally based on the principle that the atmosphere can hold exponentially more water vapor at higher temperatures. This is illustrated below, which is a plot of the \'91saturation vapor pressure of water\'92 as a function of temperature; equivalently, this figure shows how 100% relative humidity (or how air becomes completely saturated with water) changes with temperature.\
\
FIG: Vapor pressure: Saturation vapor pressure, \\(e^*\\) as a function of temperature and in units of hectopascals or hPa. Air in the real world can have less or sometimes slightly more water vapor than this, but if the water vapor concentration gets too much higher than this curve, the water will condense out into water droplets or snow.\
\
At the Earth\'92s globally averaged surface temperature of 288 K, the saturation vapor pressure increases by about 7% for a 1 K warming. Therefore the water vapor content of the atmosphere will increase by about 7% per K as the climate warms. Because water vapor is a powerful greenhouse gas, that is, it strongly absorbs and emits infrared radiation, an increase in the atmospheric water vapor content causes an increase in the downwelling infrared radiation at the Earth\'92s surface. This further increases the warming and thus the initial perturbation is amplified. So the water vapor feedback is a positive feedback.\
\
Surface evaporation can moisten a deep layer of air only if a mechanism exists to carry water vapor upward away from the surface. Turbulence of air currents near the surface helps, but isn\'92t enough to bring water vapor higher than 1 km.  Further lifting of moisture is necessary if the total moisture content of the atmosphere is to increase by very much. The most important mechanism for such further lifting is cumulus convection (see below). For this reason, convective clouds play an essential role in the water vapor feedback.\
\
FIG: cumulus convection. A picture of small and large cumulus clouds, formed by convection or rapidly rising moist air. The air around the cloud towers is slowly sinking. Some of the larger towers have flat cloud layers near their tops. These are regions where the air has stopped rising and is flowing out to the sides.\
\
The mass of water vapor in the atmosphere exceeds the mass of carbon dioxide by about a factor of 4, and water vapor contributes more to the downward infrared at the Earth\'92s surface than \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) does. Despite these facts, \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) plays a controlling role in the greenhouse effect, while water vapor plays a subservient role. The reason is that water vapor is condensible and can be removed from the atmosphere by precipitation, whereas \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) does not condense under conditions found in the Earth\'92s atmosphere.\
\
Lacis et al. (2010) illustrated the primary role of \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) through a clever and simple experiment with a climate model. When run with realistic present-day \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) concentrations, the model produces a realistic simulation of today\'92s observed climate. In the experiment, Lacis and colleagues removed all of the \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) (and other noncondensing greenhouse gases) from the atmosphere. The results were spectacular. The surface temperature began to fall immediately as a direct result of the absence of \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\). This led to a reduction in the water vapor content of the atmosphere and additional cooling through the water vapor feedback. The positive snow and ice albedo feedback also reinforced the cooling. The dramatic results are shown in the figure below. Within 10 simulated years, the Earth approached an ice-covered state in which the frigid model atmosphere contained very little water vapor.\
\
FIG: Lacis et al. Time evolution of global surface temperature, top-of-the-atmosphere (TOA) net radiation, column water vapor, planetary albedo, sea ice cover, and cloud cover, after the zeroing out of the \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) and other noncondensing greenhouse gases. The initial conditions are for a preindustrial atmosphere. Surface temperature and top-of-the-atmosphere net radiation use the left-hand scale. Lacis et al., \'91Atmospheric \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\): Principal control knob governing Earth\'92s Temperature\'92, (2010).\
\
Suppose that we ran a \'91mirror-image\'92 experiment, in which the \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) concentration was realistic but the water vapor content of the atmosphere was set to zero at the beginning of the simulation. Evaporation from the oceans would restore a realistic water vapor distribution within a few simulated weeks, and the simulated climate would stay close to what we observe today.\
\
An extreme version of the water vapor feedback, called the \'91runaway greenhouse\'92, likely occurred on Venus.(Ingersoll, \'91Planetary Climates\'92, (2013)) Venus is similarly sized compared to the Earth and very likely began its existence with a similar amount of water as the Earth. But Venus\'92 curse was that it was too close to the Sun and receives almost twice as much solar radiation as Earth (2601 \\(\\text\{W\}/\\text\{m\}^2\\) compared to Earth\'92s 1361 \\(\\text\{W\}/\\text\{m\}^2\\)). The extra solar radiation evaporated Venus\'92 oceans into its atmosphere, giving it a hot, moist, and dense water atmosphere. This would have increased the surface temperature so much that no life could survive. Water vapor that was high in Venus\'92 atmosphere could also be blown apart by high energy photons, allowing the hydrogen to escape to space. The oxygen then combined with other molecules at the surface and in the atmosphere so that eventually the hot Venus also lost its water. \
\
Current estimates suggest that it is unlikely that Earth will experience a runaway greenhouse due human activities (Ord probability here?). But if we manage to cause a mass extinction due to global warming, it will be through the water vapor feedback.\
\
Cloud Feedbacks\
\
Cloud feedbacks are infamous. Their potential importance has been recognized at least since the 1970s. For decades, they have been highlighted as a major source of uncertainty in predictions of future climate change. Why is the problem taking so long to solve?\
\
Although cloud processes are among the most important for climate, they are also among the most difficult to understand and predict. Clouds usually form in rising air, which expands and cools until condensation occurs. Cloud processes can be grouped into five categories, all of which are important for the climate system:\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf0 <ol>\
  <li>Cloud microphysical processes, involving cloud drops, ice crystals, and aerosols, with scales on the order of microns</li>\
  <li>Cloud dynamical processes associated with the motion of the air in cumulus clouds, with scales on the order of a few kilometers</li>\
  <li>Cloud radiative processes, involving the flows of both solar and terrestrial radiation through the cloud field</li>\
  <li>Cloud turbulence processes, which include near-surface turbulence, the entrainment of environmental air into the clouds, and the formation of small clouds</li>\
  <li>Cloud chemical processes, which, among other things, are important for the annual formation of the ozone hole through the destruction of ozone in polar stratospheric clouds</li>\
</ol>\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\
These various processes interact with each other on space scales of a few kilometers and time scales of a few minutes, and they also jointly interact with larger-scale weather systems, up to the size of the earth itself. Clouds also couple climate processes together. For example, they cast shadows on the land and ocean, which tend to reduce the surface temperature and evaporation rate.\
\
Each cloud process has the potential to be a feedback as the climate state evolves due to externally forced variability. As a result, there are many different kinds of cloud feedbacks. Broadly speaking, they occur through changes in cloud amount, cloud top height, and cloud optical properties. In a given climate change, there can be many different changes in the geographical patterns and seasonal distributions of both high and low clouds. The net cloud feedback results from the combined effect of these various changes.\
\
The two primary cloud feedbacks are discussed below, though several others exist\
\
\
Low-Cloud Feedback\
\
Thick clouds behave like blackbodies. Low clouds emit at relatively warm temperatures, not very different from the temperature of the Earth\'92s surface. As a result, an increase in low cloud amount has relatively little effect on Earth\'92s outgoing infrared radiation.\
\
On the other hand, low clouds can be very bright (as seen from above), reflecting back to space up to half of the solar radiation that hits them. As a result, they tend to cool the Earth. In a future climate warmed by increasing greenhouse gases, an increase in low cloud amount would increase the cooling, and so could reduce the warming. On the other hand, a decrease in low-cloud amount would increase the warming.\
\
Low cloud amount tends to be greater when the sea-surface temperature (SST) is cooler than the average SST at that latitude. For example, the SST west of San Diego, California is cooler than the average SST at 32\'b0N, and low clouds are very abundant there, especially in the summer. Over cold water, low clouds typically take the form of a uniform overcast sky. When the water is warmer, the low clouds change their type, to shallow cumulus clouds with smaller cloud fractions, which amplifies the warming. Observational evidence (e.g., Norris and Leovy, 1994; Clement et al. 2009) supports a positive feedback associated with low clouds.\
\
High-Cloud Feedback\
\
High, cold cirrus clouds are often somewhat transparent, so they don\'92t reflect as much solar radiation as typical low-level clouds, but they do efficiently absorb the infrared radiation coming from the Earth\'92s surface; the presence of cirrus clouds leads to a radiative warming near the base of the clouds. The high clouds emit to space, but only weakly because of their very cold temperatures. They therefore tend to warm the Earth as a whole. An increase in high cloud amount will tend to enhance greenhouse warming, while a decrease will tend to reduce it.\
\
Even if the high-cloud amount remains the same, the high clouds can produce a positive feedback as the surface warms up, because they will absorb the increased infrared coming from the warmer surface. Tropical cumulus clouds often stop about 15 km above the Earth\'92s surface, where the temperature is about 200 K. The tall tropical cumuli produce broad regions of optically thick cirrus and anvil clouds near their tops, which therefore emit infrared at a temperature of about 200 K. If this stays the same under global warming, then the outgoing infrared radiation will not change even when the climate changes. The outgoing radiation will therefore be insensitive to the surface temperature. The Earth will not be able to increase its infrared emission to space as the surface temperature increases. The bulk emissivity will therefore decrease as the Earth warms. This is a positive cloud feedback. \
\
\
The most important implication of this fact is that Earth\'92s tropical regions, which are often covered with cumulus and cirrus clouds, will not be able to efficiently increase their infrared emission to space from the cloud tops as the surface warms. If they can\'92t emit more radiation to space, that radiation will stay near the surface and lead to warming. A warming that leads to further warming is a positive feedback. Climate model simulations of global warming show a strong positive cloud feedback in the tropics associated with this mechanism.\
\
So if high clouds provide a positive feedback and low clouds could be either a negative feedback or a positive feedback, which one wins out? Most evidence so far indicates that the net cloud feedback of both is positive. Though this is a very active area of ongoing climate research.  \
\
cloud\'92s \
\
\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\
\
Let\'92s walk through each of these changes. The tropopause rises and along with that high tropical cumulus clouds also rise. But there\'92s a curios feature of these clouds. Even though they get taller, the tops remain approximately the same temperature, about 200 K. This means that the outgoing infrared radiation from these clouds can\'92t change even though the surface is warming.<label for="ref1" class="margin-toggle sidenote-number"></label><input type="checkbox" id="ref1" class="margin-toggle"/><span class="sidenote">Zelinka and Hartmann, <i>Why is longwave cloud feedback positive?</i>, (2010).</span> If they can\'92t emit more radiation to space, that radiation will stay near the surface and lead to further warming, which is a positive feedback.\
\
Next on the diagram we see that there will be fewer \'91anvil\'92 clouds. You can see examples of such clouds in the picture of cumulus clouds in the \'91Water Vapor Feedback\'92 section. The anvil clouds have high albedos, so fewer could lead to more absorbed solar radiation at the surface. But they are also big blackbodies in the sky that increase the amount of infrared radiation re-emitted back down to the surface; it turns out that this infrared effect is larger than the albedo effect. So on balance, fewer anvil clouds leads to a net cooling, a negative feedback.\
\
Fewer low clouds, especially fewer marine stratocumulus clouds, means that more solar radiation will hit the ocean or Earth surface instead of being reflected back to space. So a warming that produces fewer low clouds will increase the surface warming, a positive feedback.\
\
Lastly, it\'92s currently unclear whether low clouds in the high latitudes will get brighter or darker. If they get brighter, they would be a negative feedback; if they get darker, they would be a positive feedback. There are reasons to think it could go either way by a significant amount and not enough data and model evidence currently exists to say.\
\
The figure below summarizes the numeric values of all these kinds of feedbacks. Combined, they show a positive feedback, though the uncertainties are fairly large. Studying and trying to improve our understanding of cloud feedbacks is one of the most active areas of research in climate science.\
\
\
\
\
A curious feature of tropical cumulus clouds is that they often stop about 15 km above the Earth\'92s surface, about the location of the tropopause in the tropics, where the temperature is about 200 K. The broad regions of thick clouds near their tops therefore emit infrared at a blackbody temperature of about 200 K. In global warming simulations tropical cumulus clouds tend to maintain approximately the same 200 K temperature at their tops. This means that the outgoing infrared radiation from these clouds can\'92t change. The outgoing radiation will therefore be insensitive to the surface temperature. The most important implication of this fact is that Earth\'92s tropical regions, which are often covered with cumulus and cirrus clouds, will not be able to efficiently increase their infrared emission to space from the cloud tops as the surface warms. If they can\'92t emit more radiation to space, that radiation will stay near the surface and lead to warming. A warming that leads to further warming is a positive feedback. Climate model simulations of global warming show a strong positive cloud feedback in the tropics associated with this mechanism.<label for="ref1" class="margin-toggle sidenote-number"></label><input type="checkbox" id="ref1" class="margin-toggle"/><span class="sidenote">Zelinka and Hartmann, <i>Why is longwave cloud feedback positive?</i>, (2010).</span>\
\
\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\
\
\
The Lapse-Rate Feedback\
\
Recall from Chapter 2 that the troposphere gets cooler with height. The rate that temperature decreases with altitude is called the atmospheric \'91lapse rate\'92. This can be described according to the equation \\(\\Gamma = - \\frac\{dT\}\{dz\} \\), where \\(T\\) is the temperature and \\(z\\) the altitude or height. The negative sign convention gives a positive number for \\(\\Gamma\\) in the troposphere. The global average lapse rate on Earth is about 6.5 K/km. \
\
As the atmosphere warms there are basically three different ways that the lapse rate could change in the troposphere. There could be a uniform warming shift, the lower part of the troposphere could warm more than the upper part, or the upper part of the troposphere could warm more than the lower part, see below.\
\
FIG: Lapse rate changes. Caption: Schematic of possible lapse rate changes in the troposphere due to global warming, based on a tropical lapse rate profile. The black line is the original, no-global-warming profile. The blue line shifts the profile uniformly while the purple and orange lines are shifts that favor the lower or upper troposphere.\
\
If the warming is uniform through the troposphere, as in the blue line above, then there is no strong lapse-rate feedback. But if the lower or upper troposphere is preferentially warmed, then there will be some interesting effects. Infrared photons that are emitted nearer to the surface have a harder time escaping to space because they are more likely to be absorbed somewhere in the atmosphere as they try to travel out to space. So a preferential warming of the surface, as in the purple line, ends up trapping more photons near the surface, which leads to more warming\'97a positive feedback. But if there\'92s preferential warming in the upper troposphere, as in the orange line, photons have an easier time escaping to space, meaning that a warming would lead to more efficient cooling\'97a negative feedback. Using terms we learned in Chapter 3 we could say that preferential warming near the surface decreases the atmosphere\'92s emissivity while preferential warming near the top increases the atmosphere\'92s emissivity.\
\
So under global warming, which of these occurs? The answer is actually all three: different regions on Earth have different lapse rate responses. But on a global average, the lapse rate response in the tropics ends up being much stronger than anywhere else, leading to an average preferential warming with height (as in the orange line above), and thus a negative feedback. \
\
Why do the tropics have a preferential warming with height? The tropics have a lot of rising moist air or moist convection, much more than anywhere else on Earth. And when the air rises and cools, eventually water will begin to condense out of the gas phase and into the liquid phase, thus forming clouds. But the transition from gas to liquid releases energy, called \'91latent heat\'92. Just the opposite process happens when you boil water: you have to add heat to transition the water from liquid to gas. So the atmosphere gets an additional boost of energy as the moist air rises and condenses into clouds. This leads to preferential warming with height and thus the tropics have a negative lapse rate feedback.\
\
Climate Sensitivity\
\
In this chapter we have discussed the four most important climate feedbacks: albedo, water vapor, lapse rate, and cloud. While there are other feedbacks, they are small compared to these four and don\'92t contribute significantly to the overall feedback of the climate system. With both positive and negative feedback processes in the climate system, it\'92s not clear at first glance what the overall response to global warming will be. For example, we saw that tropical convection could lead to both a negative lapse-rate feedback and also a positive high-cloud feedback. How do all of these combine and which are most important? \
\
To explore this, let\'92s return to the equations from the first part of this chapter. We found that a change in temperature due to a change in radiative forcing, accounting for feedbacks, could be described by the following equation,\
\
\\[\\Delta T = \\frac\{\\lambda \\Delta R\}\{1-f\} \\; .\\]\
\
We computed that a no-atmosphere planet would have a climate sensitivity parameter of \\(\\lambda = 0.27\\,\\text\{m\}^2\\text\{K\}/\\text\{W\}\\). For Earth with a realistic atmosphere, but with feedbacks turned off, it turns out that \\(\\lambda = 0.31\\,\\text\{m\}^2\\text\{K\}/\\text\{W\}\\). We know that the feedbacks \\(f\\) are going to have to be calculated based on the climate system. Though we should note that for a stable climate system \\(-\\infty < f < 1\\). But what value should we use for \\(\\Delta R\\), the change in radiative forcing? There have been many different radiative forcings that the Earth has experienced and because we don\'92t know for sure how humans will act in the future, we don\'92t know what the cumulative radiative forcing will be due to global warming once it is all done. A useful experimental framework that makes this easier and more unified is to use a \\(\\Delta R\\) that represents a doubling of \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) from preindustrial levels. As you may recall from a previous assignment, the total radiative forcing from any doubling of \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) in Earth\'92s atmosphere is approximately the same (e.g., from 10 ppm to 20 ppm or 400 ppm to 800 ppm). In a realistic Earth atmosphere this works out to be \\(\\Delta R = 4 \\text\{W\}/\\text\{m\}^2\\). \
\
The annual- and global-mean surface air temperature response to a doubling of \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) is known as the \'91climate sensitivity\'92. Climate sensitivity is a central topic in the science of global warming. In fact many debates about global warming are often debates about the numeric value of Earth\'92s climate sensitivity because it is the theoretical concept that explains how much global warming we can expect to see. \
\
If there were no feedbacks, what would Earth\'92s climate sensitivity be (denoted as \\(\\Delta T_\{2xCO2\}\\))? With \\(f = 0\\) and using the values of \\(\\Delta R\\) and \\(\\lambda\\) above, we have that \\(\\Delta T_\{2xCO2\} = 1.24\\, K\\). What about if we add in the ice albedo feedback, \\(f_a\\)? The current best estimate(cite) of \\(f_a\\) is 0.09, so that works out to \\(\\Delta T_\{2xCO2\} = 1.36\\, K\\), for including only the albedo feedback. So the albedo feedback only increases the temperature by about 0.1 degree, which isn\'92t much. \
\
What if we put them all together? The total feedback factor is equal to the sum of the albedo, water vapor, lapse rate, and cloud feedback factors, so \\(f=f_a+f_w+f_\\Gamma+f_c=0.59\\), a value based on the most recent estimates(cite). The climate sensitivity including all these feedbacks comes out to \\(\\Delta T_\{2xCO2\} = 3.05\\, K\\). So a doubling of \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) is estimated to result in about 3 degrees of global-mean warming. If we compare this value with the no-feedbacks case, we see that feedbacks amplify the warming and contribute about 2 degrees for a \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) doubling. This is a big difference. The global warming we\'92ve experienced thus far since the 1800s is about 1.3 K. If there were no climate feedbacks, keeping global warming in check would be much easier.\
\
A very important issue we\'92ve so far neglected in this discussion about climate sensitivity is the uncertainties involved. The calculations we\'92ve made here are for the average estimates of the radiative forcing, the climate sensitivity parameter, and the feedback factors. If you include the uncertainties in each, climate sensitivity is not a single value but actually a distribution of values. And then if you include different kinds of calculations, that can produce different distributions! One ambitious study set out to include as much information as reasonably possible to estimate climate sensitivity, see below. The main distribution to look at is the black \'91Baseline PDF\'92 plotted below. \
\
You can see that the most likely value of climate sensitivity is about 3 K. But the distribution spans a fairly wide range with the 5th to 95th percentile range being 2.3-4.7 K. Smaller values indicate a climate that is less sensitive to radiative forcing while higher values indicate a climate that is more sensitive. Note also that the distributions are \'91fat tail\'92 distributions: high values of climate sensitivity cannot be ruled out until about 7 K. \
\
Sherwood, et al., <i>An Assessment of Earth\'92s Climate Sensitivity Using Multiple Lines of Evidence<i>, (2020).\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
}