{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2636
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 IBMPlexSerif-Regular;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww18020\viewh14380\viewkind0
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs36 \cf0 \
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\partightenfactor0
\cf0 Historic \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) Levels\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\partightenfactor0
\cf0 We have two kinds of direct measurements of past \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) levels in the atmosphere. One comes from ancient bubbles of air trapped in the ice sheets of Antarctica and Greenland. We can measure the gases in these bubbles if we extract a core of ice from Antarctica and take it back to a lab and melt it down inside a chamber. The other measurements we have of past atmospheric \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) were made using scientific equipment starting with the work of David Keeling in 1957 that we read about in Chapter 1. If you stitch these two kinds of records together, this is what we get for atmospheric \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) over the past 800,000 years:\
\
FIG: IPCC atmospheric CO2\
\
We see fluctuations between 180 ppm and 280 ppm during the ice age cycles, followed by a steady ~280 ppm through the past 1900 years, and then a strong rise up to the present. The story of what caused the ice age fluctuations in \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) turns out to be fairly complicated and so we won\'92t cover that here. But the rise in \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) over the past 200 years or so is far better understood because we have so much more data. \
\
Over the past decade humans have been emitting about 38 Gton \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) per year (or about 10 Gton C per year, counting only the carbon atoms and not the oxygen atoms). This is mostly a carbon flux from the solid Earth, from combustion of fossil fuels and cement manufacture, supplemented by the destruction of carbon biomass on land. Our carbon emissions are 100 times larger than the analogous natural carbon flux from the solid Earth to the atmosphere, the degassing of \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) in volcanic gases and deep sea hot spring fluids (about 0.1 Gton C per year). The human-\'adassociated emission rate has been growing since the 1800s, with only minor short-term decreases for major crises like the COVID-19 pandemic:\
\
FIG: Fossil fuel emission rate from fossil fuels and land use\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
Prior to about 1950, the largest source of human-caused \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) emissions came from deforestation and changes in land use (e.g., replacing grasslands with cities). Natural forested landscapes hold far more carbon than agricultural fields or human cities, so the destruction of these landscapes and burning or decomposition of the trees and plants leads to \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) emissions. After about 1950, fossil fuel emissions have increasingly dominated the total human emissions, as we can see in the figure above. \
\
The atmospheric \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) concentration is rising by about 2 ppm/year on average. This rate of concentration increase represents about 4 Gton C per year. This is less than half the rate of the human emission of \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\), about 10 Gton C per year. So where is the rest of the human-emitted carbon going? There are two possibilities: carbon can go into the land biosphere or it can go into the ocean. \
\
It is much easier to measure the rate at which fossil fuel \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) is being dissolved in the ocean than it is to measure land uptake. The chemistry of the ocean is smoother, more homogeneous, so that a curtain or \'91transect\'92 of measurements (from a range of depths along a ship cruise track) can reveal smooth large-\'ad scale patterns in temperature, chemical concentrations, and so forth. The land surface, in contrast, is extremely heterogeneous. To measure a trend in the amount of carbon in all the soils on Earth would require an almost unimaginable number of soil carbon measurements; therefore different approaches must be used for estimating land carbon uptake than ocean carbon uptake.\
\
Ocean Uptake \
\
The most direct way to measure the flux of fossil fuel \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) dissolving in the ocean is to make lots of measurements of the chemistry of the surface ocean. The rate at which \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) dissolves into the surface ocean or evaporates from it depends on the extent of chemical disequilibrium between the air and the water: the larger the disequilibrium, the larger the rate of \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) flux. \
\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 The \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) of the surface ocean is wildly variable, ranging from 250 ppm in some locations and seasons up to 500 ppm in others. The atmospheric value is at 415 ppm (in 2022), varying with a seasonal cycle of 10 ppm in some places. These spatial differences mean that in some locations there is an average \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) flux dissolving into the oceans and that in others, there is \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) degassing. In total, there are \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) exchange fluxes into and out of the ocean of approximately 90 Gton C per year. If, on average, there is a difference between the total \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) fluxing in and the total \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) fluxing out, then there is a \'91net flux\'92 of \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\). \
\
The net flux of oceanic \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) is estimated using to primary methods: those that are based on global ocean biogeochemistry models and those that are based on measurements. If multiple independent approaches arrive at similar conclusions we can have more confidence in the results. Below are model- and measurement-based estimates of the ocean \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) flux since 1960. These different approaches show an increase in \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) net flux into the ocean, from about 1 Gton C in 1960 to about 3 Gton C in 2020.\
\
FIG: ocean sink. \
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
The bottom line is that the oceans in the mid-\'ad1990s had taken up about 180 Gton C, or about a third of all human-\'adreleased carbon. Every year the ocean takes up about 2 Gton C, accounting for about a third of the uptake of human-\'adreleased carbon by the natural world. \
\
Land Uptake \
\
Deforestation converts organic carbon from biomass and soils into \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) added to the atmosphere. This represents a significant fraction of the human \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) release, about 1.5 Gton C per year, compared with fossil fuel combustion, at about 8.5 Gton C per year (see box 4.1, \'93Human Carbon Emissions\'94). \
\
In order to balance the year-\'adto-\'adyear carbon budget, we need a carbon sink on land, some change in the land carbon cycle other than deforestation, which has been called the missing sink. The missing sink is sized by difference of the other known fluxes: if it\'92s emitted but it\'92s not in the atmosphere or the ocean, it must be on land. \
\
Uptake into the land biosphere differs from dissolution in the ocean in that the photosynthesis that drives land uptake releases oxygen gas (O 2 ) to the atmosphere, whereas \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) dissolving in the ocean does not. The concentration of oxygen is decreasing very slightly, owing to the combustion of fossil fuel organic carbon (see box 1.4, \'93Photosynthesis and Respiration\'94). But some of this decrease is offset by the oxygen released by of the increase in biological and organic carbon on land. The oxygen and \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) results are consistent with the other estimates, with 2 Gton C per year net uptake on land and 2 Gton C per year into the ocean (Keeling, Piper, and Heinman 1996). \
\
A reconstruction of the history of carbon fluxes is shown in figure 9. In the early part of the industrial period, deforestation outpaced any natural land sink, driving atmospheric \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) slowly upward until about 1950. In the last fifty years the natural carbon sink has kicked in, taking up enough carbon to bring the land surface, overall, back to a balance of zero net emissions. In the last few years it appears as though the land surface overall has provided a net sink of 1\'96 2 Gton C per year. \
\
But it has proven impossible so far to actually lay hands on this carbon. A gigaton of carbon is a lot of stuff. The entire mass of humankind, not just our carbon but water and bones and all, comes to maybe 0.5 Gton. It\'92s rather amazing that all this stuff can disappear without a trace every year. Much of it is probably hiding within all the heterogeneity of the soil organic carbon pool. \
\
One way to look for the missing carbon is to analyze the variations in \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) concentration in the atmosphere around the globe. The data are carefully cross-\'ad calibrated so that slight differences in concentrations from one location to another, or one time to another, are meaningful. The data are analyzed in the context of models of atmospheric circulation (the weather). If the Siberian tundra is a carbon sink because a longer growing season allows shrubs to take hold, then the \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) concentration in the air will decrease a bit as the winds blow over Siberia. These \'93atmospheric inversions\'94 generally (but not always) find the missing carbon in the northern high latitudes (Gurney 2002). \
\
It is possible to estimate the flux of \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) going into or coming out of the land surface by measuring the variations in \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) concentration on a tower, second by second, along with measurements of the vertical wind direction. If the puffs of air blowing downward carry more \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) than the upward-\'ad flowing air, then the land surface must be taking up \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) . This is called an eddy correlation method (Baldocchi 1996). The method averages the carbon fluxes over some area: the taller the tower the broader the footprint. The measurements can be used to understand better the processes that might be controlling the land carbon uptake, but so far it has not been possible to scale this type of measurement up to global coverage. \
\
One potential cause of the terrestrial uptake is a \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) fertilization effect, which stimulates plants to grow faster or larger in a high-\'ad\\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) atmosphere. Greenhouses owe much of their magic to elevated \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) concentrations in the air inside them, maintained perhaps by respiration of the organic carbon in the rich soils. Leaf photosynthesis takes place behind a waxy seal, with gas ports called stomata that can be actively opened and closed. The penalty for opening the stomata is the loss of water as vapor. If the \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) concentration in the air is higher, the plants can accomplish their business without losing as much water. The enzyme responsible for \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) uptake, called rubisco, also runs more quickly at higher \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) concentrations. \
\
Plant growth experiments can be done in the laboratory, but it\'92s not clear how applicable the results of a lab experiment are to the real world. Forestry scientists are taking the experiment into the real world by adding \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) to the air upstream of a grove of trees from a ring of towers \'ad around the grove. Trees subjected to elevated \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) concentrations are found to grow more quickly, but it\'92s not at all clear that they will store more carbon in the end (Lichter 2008; Norby 2002). \
\
Computer models have been constructed of the land surface that predict the types of vegetative cover (pines versus deciduous trees versus tundra, etc.) and the carbon stored per acre. The model variables evolve through time in response to changes in rainfall and temperature and atmospheric \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) concentration (Cramer et al. 2001). They balance the potential rates of photosynthesis against the demands of the environment, such as competition between plant types for sunlight, and dealing with water stress. In general, the models work pretty well, reproducing past changes in land biomes with changes in climate. The current generation of land carbon cycle models predicts stronger growth under higher \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) conditions, but the latest models, which include the effects of nitrogen limitation, predict a weaker \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) fertilization effect.\
\
\
Other potential mechanisms to explain the mysterious terrestrial carbon uptake include a longer growing season as the climate warms, especially in high latitudes. It could be reforestation, driven by the agricultural revolution increasing crop yields, allowing former farmland to return to forest. Or it could be that nitrate, NO 3\'96 , in acid rain is fertilizing the plants. Maybe fire suppression in managed \'93natural\'94 forests is allowing soil and litter carbon stocks to build up. \
\
In the end, we know the rate of carbon uptake by the land surface by the difference between other carbon fluxes that are known better: human emission and ocean invasion. Neither the mechanism nor the location of the missing carbon is known for sure. It will be useful to figure out the real mechanism driving the carbon uptake because it determines how the land will interact with the carbon cycle in the future. \
\
The Future of the Carbon Cycle \
\
Over millions of years, the carbon cycle acts to stabilize and regulate climate. Changes in the geometry of the Earth\'92s surface, driven by plate tectonics, push the \'93set-\'ad point\'94 of the \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) thermostat up and down, allowing Earth\'92s climate to drift slowly from hothouse to icy states. But the carbon cycle is functioning as a regulator of climate, a stabilizing negative feedback. On glacial cycle time scales of tens of thousands of years, the character of the carbon cycle has changed to that of a climate amplifier. The orbital forcing is presumably the ultimate trigger, and the carbon cycle amplifies this Northern Hemisphere forcing into a global response. \
\
Now, on a time scale of decades, the carbon cycle is absorbing the blow of the global warming climate event by taking \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) out of the atmosphere, a stabilizing negative feedback. Does this mean that the carbon cycle will eventually switch roles on us in the future, amplifying global warming? \
\
There are other differences between the glacial cycles and global warming than timing. The glacial cycles were instigated by changes in temperature, resulting from the distribution of sunlight in latitude and season and amplified by the albedo change from the ice sheets. Some positive carbon cycle feedback drove atmospheric \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) to further amplify the temperature swings. \
\
Today, the Earth\'92s system is being driven by changes to \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) directly. The carbon cycle is inhaling because it is driven by the higher concentration of \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) in the atmosphere. Eventually, however, climate warming might drive the carbon cycle to begin exhaling. \
\
Future Carbon Cycle Feedbacks \
\
It\'92s not easy to predict how the land biosphere carbon reservoir will play its hand, whether it will dump carbon or hoard it in response to human \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) emission. The problem is that it\'92s not clear what processes or mechanisms are controlling the carbon uptake of the land surface today, making it difficult to project into the future. Also, humankind controls a lot of the land surface, so predicting its behavior as a carbon reservoir in the coming century is as much a sociological question as a physical science one. \
\
But there are powerful reasons to worry that the land biosphere could release more than it takes up with an intensification of warming. The concentration of organic carbon in soils is a strong function of temperature. This is because when a leaf falls into the dirt, it decomposes more quickly in warm conditions than colder ones (see box 1.4, \'93Photosynthesis and Respiration\'94). Generally, the rates of biological processes such as decomposition more-\'ad or-\'ad less double in response to 10\'b0C of warming (up to a point, until the biomolecular machinery starts breaking down). Soil carbon levels are highest in the chilly high latitudes and very low in tropical soils, even in rain forests that are lush aboveground, because the carbon decomposes more quickly in the tropical soils. \
\
Soil carbon concentrations could change dramatically in high latitudes where peat deposits are currently preserved from degradation by being frozen in soils called permafrosts. Peats are thought to contain hundreds of Gton C. Permafrost soils, depending on their thickness, can take centuries to melt, and have been melting back naturally for centuries since the end of the Little Ice Age, around the year 1830 (Lemke et al. 2007). \
\
There is a zone near the soil surface, called the \'93active zone,\'94 that melts in summer and refreezes in winter. This seasonally melted zone has been getting thicker over the past few decades in response to climate warming, potentially exposing more carbon in soils to degradation. Lakes also provide a pathway for degrading permafrost carbon around their boundaries, where the liquid water encounters the frozen soil. The anoxic condition of lake sediments provokes anaerobic fermentation of the carbon, producing methane as well as \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) , which reach the atmosphere in rings of bubbles around the lake periphery \'ad (Walter et al. 2006). \
\
Another carbon reservoir to watch out for is the methane hydrates in the ocean. These are described more completely in chapter 5, but it is worth noting for now that a warming of the sediment column could provoke these ices to melt, potentially releasing their methane into the ocean or the atmosphere. The potential of methane hydrates to alter the future climate is huge, but it will take millennia for global warming to penetrate the sediment column where most of the hydrate is. Methane hydrates therefore would probably add to the global warming climate event only in the very long term (Archer 2007). \
\
In the end, there is more carbon available as fossil fuel than the land surface could possibly take up or give off, so in a business-\'ad as-\'ad usual scenario the carbon fluxes from the land surface would probably be smaller than the human fluxes. Hydrates in the ocean could potentially release as much carbon as humans do, probably over thousands of years. The fossil fuel carbon will be joined by whatever feedback carbon shows up, to share a common fate of dissolution into the ocean and slow reabsorption into the Earth by the CaCO 3 pH-\'ad stat and the weathering \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) thermostat. \
\
The Fate of Fossil Fuel \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) in the Carbon Cycle \
\
Although 70% of the Earth\'92s surface is covered by ocean, most of the volume of the ocean, the cold abyssal water, is in contact with the atmosphere only in the coldest of places and times: the high latitudes in winter. In these places there may be sea ice separating air from water and slowing the \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) invasion of the deep sea even further. This bottleneck of getting gases into the abyss is why \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) uptake in the deep ocean takes much longer than one would expect based on the kinetics of gas exchange alone (see box 4.2, \'93Air-\'adSea Exchange of \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) Gas\'94). \
\
The overturning circulation of the ocean, which carries surface waters laden with fossil fuel \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) into the deep, could decrease with climate change, slowing \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) uptake into the deep ocean. This circulation is driven by the production of very dense waters in high latitudes, but temperatures in high latitudes will rise and, more important, rainfall will increase, leaving surface waters fresher, warmer, and therefore less dense than they used to be. The result could be a period of stagnation, lasting centuries or longer, that could impede the invasion of \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) into the deep ocean. \
\
The accelerating rise of atmospheric \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) tends to drive \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) invasion into the ocean more quickly. Counteracting this is depletion of the buffer chemistry of surface seawater. In general, doubling the \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) halves the CO 3= concentration in seawater, halving the ability of the seawater to absorb more \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) (see box 3.1, \'93Carbonate System pH Chemistry\'94). The higher atmospheric \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) goes, the weaker the ocean buffer will become. \
\
And then there is the question of the glacial \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) cycles. This was a positive feedback, originating in the oceans and releasing \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) when temperatures rose, as explained in chapter 3. Our ignorance of how this happened undermines our confidence in predicting the future. If the unidentified positive feedback from the past rears its head in the future, it would make the \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) airborne fraction higher than what the models predict. \
\
After the slug of new \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) spreads out and equilibrates between the atmosphere and the ocean, the p\\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) of the atmosphere remains higher than it would have been for what carbon cycle modelers call the long tail. The residual airborne fraction of the \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) slug awaits neutralstat ization by the CaCO 3 pH-\'ad and ultimate burial by the weathering \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) thermostat (see box 4.3, \'93Airborne Fraction of a \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) Slug over Geologic Time\'94). \
\
The time constant for the weathering \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) thermostat (see chapter 2) is hundreds of thousands of years, similar to the oscillation time of the glacial/interglacial cycles. This means that the future evolution of climate on these time scales will probably be determined by the interaction of the \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) tail with the wobbles in Earth\'92s orbit around the sun. \
\
In the natural course of events, a new Laurentide ice sheet in Canada will nucleate and begin growing at some point in the future. The glacial/interglacial cycles have taken 100,000 years overall, but the interglacial intervals have been short, only about 10,000 years, and this is how long our current interglacial interval has already lasted (Hays, Imbrie, and Shackleton 1976). It initially seemed that the next ice age might be geologically imminent, that is to say it might start in just a few thousand years. (Note that in this context, the word \'93soon\'94 has a different meaning for geologists than it usually does for, say, economists.) \
\
However, the orbit of the Earth around the sun today is nearly circular, a state Earth revisits about every 400,000 years (Paillard 2001). All the points of the circle are the same distance from the sun, so this configuration eliminates much of the variation in sunlight intensity that drives the glacial cycles. The last time of circular orbit was 400,000 years ago, a time with a long interglacial interval that lasted 50,000 years. The past few glacial cycles have been driven by more intense orbital forcing than the next few glacial cycles will be. So it is entirely possible that the natural future evolution of Earth\'92s climate would be continued warmth for the next, say, 50,000 years, followed by gradual cooling driven by the growth of ice sheets in the northern high latitudes and a mysterious drawdown in atmospheric \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) concentration. \
\
The effect of the long tail of fossil fuel \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) in the atmosphere will be to make it harder for ice sheets to nucleate and begin to grow in the Northern Hemisphere. The fossil fuel era may stave off the next ice age, which was due in 50,000 years but may now be delayed for 500,000 years (Archer and Ganapolski 2005). \
\
The bottom line is that atmospheric \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) concentration will peak for a few centuries and then subside into the long tail (see box 4.3, \'93Airborne Fraction of a \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) Slug over Geologic Time\'94). The long tail of global warming will have particular impact on slowly changing components of the climate system such as the ice sheets and permafrost soils. The full response of the sea level to changes in Earth\'92s temperature in the past was 100 times greater than the forecast for sea-\'ad level change in the year 2100 because it takes time to melt an ice sheet. We will also be entering the time realm of the spiteful saboteur wing of the carbon cycle. The long tail of global warming will be plenty long enough for ice sheets, permafrosts, and the carbon cycle to respond completely.\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
}