{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2638
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 FiraSans-Regular;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 Menlo-Bold;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww18020\viewh19640\viewkind0
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs36 \cf0 \
\
Earth's Geologic Carbon Cycle\
\
Earth\'92s Carbon Reservoirs\
\
\\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) is a trace constituent in the atmosphere, comprising only about 0.0415% of all the gas molecules (which works out to 415 ppm, or parts per million). If all the CO<sub>2</sub> in the atmosphere were to solidify into dry ice, the snowfall would be only about 10 cm deep. The atmosphere currently contains about 780 Gton C (Gton is \'91giga-ton\'92, where 1 Gton C = 10<sup>15</sup> g C) .  \
\
The atmosphere acts as a kind of Grand Central or King\'92s Cross Station with respect to the carbon cycle: The other reservoirs interact with each other primarily by trading carbon through the atmosphere, even though the atmosphere holds only a tiny fraction of Earth\'92s carbon. The situation is different on Venus, for most of that planet\'92s carbon is found in its atmosphere, not its rocks like on Earth. The difference between the two planets is liquid water, which enables weathering chemical reactions to take place on Earth that cycle CO<sub>2</sub> between the atmosphere and the solid Earth. Venus lost its water early on, however, and its probable moderate early temperature has never returned.\
\
The land biosphere is the most visible part of the carbon cycle to us, and it holds much more carbon than the ocean biosphere does (e.g., trees are much larger than single-\'adcelled plankton). The land surface stores carbon in organic form in living things and even more abundantly as the organic carbon remains of plants in soils. Grasslands accumulate a lot of organic carbon in their soils, so that the total amount of carbon per acre is about equal to that in forests, even though the carbon is more obvious in the forests. There is about as much living carbon on land as there is atmospheric carbon, perhaps 500 Gton C. \
\
The amount of carbon in Earth\'92s soil depends on how deep the boundary is between soil and the underlying rocks, where soils might be affected by changes in climate but the carbon below that is out of reach. The usual soil depth is assumed to be one meter, resulting in a soil carbon pool of about 1,500 Gton C as soil carbon, twice as much as is in the atmosphere. \
\
The oceans contain about fifty times more carbon than the atmosphere does, about 38,000 Gton C. Most of the carbon in the ocean is in the inorganic forms: dissolved \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) , carbonic acid (\\(\\text\{H\}_2\\text\{CO\}_3\\)), bicarbonate ions (\\(\\text\{HCO\}_3^\{\'96\}\\)), and carbonate ions (\\(\\text\{CO\}_3^\{=\}\\)). \
\
Sedimentary rocks contain most of the Earth\'92s carbon, in chemical forms of limestone (CaCO_3) and organic carbon, mostly in the form of a random indescribable goo called kerogen. These total to approximately 1,200,000 Gton C. The sediments that are now rocks were originally deposited in water but are now found over most of the surface of the Earth, including the highest mountaintops. Fossil fuels make up only a small fraction of the buried organic carbon in the Earth, but even so, there is enough carbon to knock the carbon cycle significantly out of whack. Fossil fuels total about 5000 Gton C.\
\
Fossil fuel combustion takes carbon that was sleeping in sedimentary rocks and injects it into the atmosphere. Most of the fossil carbon is coal, and of that there is enough to increase the \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) concentration of the atmosphere to about ten times its natural concentration, if it were all released at the same time.\
\
\
The Atmospheric CO<sub>2</sub> Thermostat \
\
Earth\'92s climate has navigated a path that stayed within a relatively narrow temperature range, the freezing and boiling points of water, since the very first sedimentary rocks appeared, shortly after the birth of the Earth. Meanwhile, the heat source for the surface of the Earth, the sun, has gotten 25% brighter over geologic time. This \'91faint young sun paradox\'92 was first noted by the astronomer Carl Sagan (Sagan and Mullen 1972). \
\
Part of the explanation of this stability has to do with the carbon cycle and a mechanism called the weathering \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) thermostat, which stabilizes Earth\'92s climate by regulating the \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) concentration in the atmosphere. This mechanism is based on a chemical reaction called the Urey reaction (Urey 1952):\
\
\\[\\text\{CaSiO\}_3 + \\text\{CO\}_2 
\f1\b\fs32 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\\longleftrightarrow \\text\{
\f0\b0\fs36 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 CaCO\}_3 + \\text\{SiO\}_2 \\; .\\]\
\
The first compound, CaSiO_3 , is the simplest possible chemical formula for igneous rocks. Most real rocks have other elements in them, such as aluminum and sodium, and much more complicated chemical formulas than CaSiO_3 . As this equation operates in the world, carbon is recruited from atmospheric \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) and ultimately winds up in the chemical form of CaCO_3 in sediments of the ocean. Chemical weathering, the chemical breaking down of rocks, acts as a carbon sink (the opposite of a source) and provides a pathway for carbon to exit the fast surface carbon cycle and return to the solid Earth. This process represents the Urey reaction working from left to right: CaSiO_3 + \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) \\rightarrow CaCO_3 + SiO_2.\
\
The main idea behind the atmospheric \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) thermostat is that when the temperature of the Earth rises, it accelerates the hydrologic cycle (the amount of freshwater running off the continents) and therefore the rate of chemical weathering (Walker, Hays, and Kastin 1981). This effect is due to the fact that warmer air can hold more water vapor. More water vapor generates more rain when it gets squeezed out of the air as it rises and cools. Runoff rates on Earth today are much higher in the warm tropics than in the cooler high latitudes (Holland 1978). Everything else being equal, the weathering carbon sink would be stronger on a warmer planet than a cooler one.\
\
The carbon sink from chemical weathering is balanced in a steady state by a carbon source, the Urey reaction operating from right to left: CaSiO_3 + \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) \\leftarrow CaCO_3 + SiO_2. This process comes from the melting down of carbonate rocks in the solid Earth and \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) coming to the surface in volcanic gases and hot spring fluids. \
\
FIG: Archer. This figure summarizes the source and sink components of the weathering-\\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) thermostat:\
\
The combination of independent source and concentration-\'addependent sink for \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) makes for a stable negative feedback system that ultimately controls the \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) concentration and thus the Earth\'92s temperature. For example, if the atmospheric \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) concentration were too high, weathering would consume more \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) than could be replenished by the volcanic carbon source, and the atmospheric \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) concentration would drop. The planet would cool, slowing the hydrologic cycle, and decreasing chemical weathering. Eventually, after a few hundred thousand years, the weathering sink would return to balance with the \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) source. \
\
FIG: Schematic figure?\
\
The weathering \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) thermostat is at least partly responsible for the stability of Earth\'92s temperature through geologic time, even as the heat output of the sun gradually increases (Carl Sagan\'92s faint young sun paradox). Geologists find sedimentary rocks from the very earliest days of the history of the Earth, indicating that the Earth\'92s temperature has managed to stay within the boiling and freezing temperatures of water for this entire time (although there may be a temporary exception to this rule in the \'91snowball Earth\'92 scenario).\
\
It\'92s not clear that the weathering \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) thermostat can explain the entire span of Earth\'92s history&mdash;the sun was so cool during the earliest days of Earth\'92s history that some other greenhouse gas, perhaps methane or ammonia, might have been helping keep the Earth warm. But the \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) thermostat serves as a sufficient explanation of the stability, and the vagaries, of global climate for the Phanerozoic era, the time of formation of the fossil-\'adbearing deposits from the last 600 million years into the present, about which we know a lot more than about earlier times. \
\
The strongest evidence in support of a weathering CO 2 thermostat mechanism is the stability of the \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) concentration in the atmosphere through the last 800,000 years, for which we have ice core \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) data. If the \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) sources (volcanoes) and sinks (weathering) were out of balance by 10%, they could double the \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) concentration in the air in about 50,000 years. There are glacial-interglacial cycles in \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) concentration (SIDE FIG), but there is no long-\'adterm trend upward or downward in the concentrations. On long time averages, the fluxes balance to much better than 10% (Zeebe 2008).\
\
The Slowest Climate Changes \
\
The weathering \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) thermostat tries to maintain the \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) concentration of the atmosphere, and the climate, at some set-\'adpoint, but there are ways in which factors such as the placement of the continents on the Earth\'92s surface and the creation of mountains by tectonic plate collisions can alter the set-\'adpoint of the thermostat (Berner 2004). On time scales of tens and hundreds of millions of years, the temperature of the Earth drifts up and down, between icy worlds like today\'92s, when the Earth sports large ice sheets at or near both poles, called icehouse climates, and hothouse times, when the Earth would have been above freezing all year round even at the poles. \
\
Mountains tend to accelerate the global rate of chemical weathering by exposing fresh igneous rock to chemical scouring by freshwater. When igneous rocks weather, not all of the atoms are soluble in water. Some recrystallize back out of solution, forming another class of mineral called clay minerals. Clay minerals tend to have more water in their chemical structure than igneous rock minerals do, and they are softer. The clays left behind form the basis for the soils that cover most of the land\'92s surface. Soils impede weathering by limiting contact between the rocks and the water. \
\
Tectonic uplift, driven by plate collisions, therefore accelerates the rate of chemical weathering. But in steady state, after the weathering-\\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) thermostat has had time to equilibrate, the total rate of \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) consumption by weathering on Earth needs to balance the rate of \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) emerging from the Earth in volcanoes and hot springs. The end result of uplift, then, is to pull the atmospheric \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) concentration to a lower value, cooling the planet. The increased \'91weatherability\'92 of a planet with mountains on it will be compensated for by a cooler climate and lower atmospheric \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) concentration. One theory for a generally cooling climate of the Earth over the last tens of millions of years, since the last \'91hothouse\'92 era, about 50 million years ago, is the uplift of the Himalayas, driven by the collision of the Indian and Asian tectonic plates. \
\
FIG: Temperature cooling from Eocene to the present\
\
There is more runoff in lower latitudes, so if by chance the continents of the Earth find themselves mostly in the low latitudes near the equator, it would tend to stimulate weathering and draw down atmospheric \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\). Flooding and exposure of the continents by fluctuating sea levels also affects weathering, because weathering happens only on land, not under the oceans. On million-\'adyear time scales, global sea levels seem to rise and fall by hundreds of meters, as reconstructed by the area of the continental crust that is covered in ocean water, the way the continental shelves ringing most land areas are covered today. It is not clear why or how sea level varies this much, but it could be driven by changes in the average density of ocean crust, driven perhaps by the rate of seafloor spreading, or it could be that there is enough water dissolved in the minerals of the mantle to affect sea level as the water flows in and out of the solid Earth. \
\
Plants and trees have the capacity to change the weatherability of the land surface, and therefore the set-point of the \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) thermostat and the climate of the Earth. Plants take up \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) through their leaves and release most of it below the soil surface, raising the soil gas \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) concentration to many times higher than the atmospheric concentration. \
\
Since \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) is on the left-\'adhand, \'91reactant\'92 side of the Urey reaction, higher \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) concentrations should push the equilibrium chemical reaction to the right, dissolving more igneous rock. Plants, by pumping \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) into the soils, might thereby be accelerating the rate of chemical weathering. By stimulating the chemical weathering reaction, the conquest of the land surface by plants in the Silurian (ending about 416 million years ago) may have acted to cool the planet. \
\
The rate of \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) degassing from the Earth is also likely to vary through time. Most of the carbon is assumed to be recycled, from sedimentary rocks that subducted and ultimately released their \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) in the reverse, right-to-left\'ad direction of the Urey reaction, \\(\\text\{CaSiO\}_3 + \\text\{CO\}_2 \\rightarrow \\text\{CaCO\}_3 + \\text\{SiO\}_2\\), this transformation is called metamorphism because it takes place at temperatures at which the rocks begin to deform and change chemically into what are called metamorphic rocks. Marble, for example, is metamorphosed \\(\\text\{CaCO\}_3\\). \
\
It appears, however, to take exceptional circumstances to drive \\(\\text\{CaCO\}_3\\) into a subduction zone. Subduction zones tend to be found in the deepest parts of the ocean, where the crust has cooled and become denser. Yet \\(\\text\{CaCO\}_3\\) tends to deposit in shallower and mid-\'addepth waters, because it usually dissolves under the higher pres\'adsure in the deep ocean. So in order for \\(\\text\{CaCO\}_3\\) to be subducted efficiently, the subduction must be of a relatively shallow ocean floor. One such time this happened was when India collided with Asia, squeezing the \\(\\text\{CaCO\}_3\\)-\'adrich sediments of the shallow Tethys Sea off the face of the Earth. The resulting \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) flux into the atmosphere may have been the reason for the warm early Eocene climate (Edmond 2003). \
\
FIG: Tethys sea and warm Eocene highlighted\
\
\
There is a computer model of the geologic carbon cycle, developed over decades by Bob Berner, called Geocarb (Berner and Kothavala 2001; Berner, Lasaga, and Garrels 1983). The drivers that Geocarb is most sensitive to are the plant invasion of land in the Silurian; the rate of seafloor spreading, which controls sea level and CO2 degassing; and tectonic effects such as mountain building and the geographic distribution of the continents. The Geocarb model predicts high CO2 concentrations in eras of Earth\'92s history that geologists know to be warm, and low CO2 concentrations in glaciated times:\
\
FIG: Geocarb \
\
There are no ice core CO2 concentration measurements from millions of years ago. Estimates of past CO2 concentrations from these times are based on more indirect, \'91proxy\'92 data rather than on direct measurement (Royer 2006). Some proxies used to estimate past CO2 concentrations include: the density of vents in the waxy seal, called stomata, on the bottoms of leaves; the carbon isotopic composition of CaCO3 that forms in arid soils; the carbon isotopic compositions of particular biomolecules; and the isotopic composition of boron atoms trapped in CaCO3. None of the available proxies for pre-\'adice core atmospheric CO2 concentration are completely bullet-\'adproof, but it is reassuring that most of the available credible proxy techniques seem to give the same general answers about when CO2 levels in the past were higher than today. \
\
FIG: T vs CO2 d11B \
\
The weathering-CO2 thermostat operates on the order of hundreds of thousands of years. If the rate of CO2 degassing from Earth were to increase suddenly, changing the set-\'adpoint of the CO2 thermostat, it would therefore take hundreds of thousands of years for CO2 and the climate to fully respond to that change. The grand climate shifts between \'91hothouse\'92 and \'91icehouse\'92 in the geologic past generally took place on time scales much longer than the thermostat response time, drifting up and down over tens of millions of years. The pacing of these climate shifts is therefore set by the time scales of plate tectonics, the mountain building and soil formation, and changes in sea level and continental area, rather than by how fast the weathering-CO2 thermostat can respond.\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
Another characteristic of life on Earth is that it seems to possess an intrinsic stability. Fossil carbon energy production and carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) release take place in the context of three grand stabilizing feedback systems in the global biosphere carbon cycle: the weathering CO 2 thermostat, the oxygen homeostat, and the ocean\'92s calcium carbonate pH-\'ad stat.\
\
Carbon Dioxide \
\
Earth\'92s climate has navigated a path that stayed within a narrow range, the freezing and boiling points of water, since the very first sedimentary rocks appeared, shortly after the birth of the Earth. Meanwhile, the heat source for the surface of the Earth, the sun, has gotten 25% brighter over geologic time. This \'93faint young sun paradox\'94 was first noted by the astronomer Carl Sagan (Sagan and Mullen 1972). Part of the explanation has to do with the carbon cycle and a mechanism called the weathering CO 2 thermostat, which stabilizes Earth\'92s climate by regulating the CO 2 concentration in the atmosphere (see chapter 2). The idea is that the rate of chemical weathering, which results in carbon sequestration as calcium carbonate (CaCO 3 ) in sedimentary rocks, increases as a function of temperature, pulling the CO 2 concentration down if the Earth is too warm or allowing it to build up if the Earth is too cold. Unfortunately for the global warming climate event, it will take hundreds of thousands of years for the thermostat to restore Earth\'92s climate to its natural carbon-\'ad cycle balance (Archer 2009).\
\
The Moods of the Carbon Cycle \
\
To say that the carbon cycle is highly nonlinear is an understatement; we might even think of it as quirky. In some instances and on some time scales, the carbon cycle acts as a stabilizing influence on climate, a negative feedback. This is true today, for example: the oceans and some component of the land surface are removing CO 2 from the atmosphere at a significant rate, reducing the climate impact of our releasing that CO 2 . In other cases, on different time scales and with different web diagrams of cause and effect, the carbon cycle can be an amplifier of climate variability, as for instance a co-\'ad conspirator in the ice age climate cycles that have been changing the face of the Earth for the last 2 million years.\
\
The Stable Geologic Carbon Cycle \
\
On time scales of a million years and longer, the weathering CO 2 thermostat mechanism regulates the atmospheric CO 2 concentration and the climate of the Earth. The components of the thermostat are chemical weathering\'ad \'97essentially the dissolution of rocks into freshwater on land\'97 and CO 2 degassing from the Earth in volcanic gases and deep-\'ad sea hydrothermal vent fluids (Walker, Hays, and Kasting 1981). The set-\'ad point of the CO 2 thermostat can be tweaked, like changing the target temperature of a house\'92s thermostat. Any change in the processes of chemical weather\'ad ing or CO 2 degassing can alter the set-\'ad point of the thermostat. Mountain uplift makes bedrock dissolve faster by shedding soils and exposing them to erosion. Plants pump CO 2 down into soil gases, which drives the rocks chemically to dissolve. If the continents of the Earth happen to drift into the tropics, they will dissolve more quickly because there is more rainfall in the tropics. Making it easier to do chemical weathering depletes the atmosphere of CO 2 , cooling the planet until the rate of chemical weathering falls back into balance with CO 2 degassing from the Earth. If the rate of CO 2 emission from the Earth were higher at some point in the past, it would have pushed atmospheric CO 2 to a higher concentration and the Earth to a warmer climate, until the weathering rate was high enough to balance the higher rate of CO 2 degassing. These are the processes invoked to explain the slow shifts in Earth\'92s climate from the hothouse climates of 50 million years ago to the icy climates such as today\'92s.\
\
\
The Unstable Ice Age Carbon Cycle \
\
For the last several million years, ice sheets and glaciers around the world, and particularly in North America and northern Europe, have grown and melted back in a complex rhythm with beats of tens and hundreds of thousands of years. The timing of the ice sheets\'92 growing and collapsing coincides with the rhythm of variations in Earth\'92s orbit around the sun. In particular, the ice seems to depend on the intensity of sunlight at about 65\'b0 North latitude, at around the summer solstice. When John Imbrie wrote his classic book Ice Ages in 1979, the story seemed all but solved (Imbrie and Imbrie 1979). Then came measurements of the CO 2 concentration in bubbles of ancient atmosphere trapped in polar ice. The measurements showed that the CO 2 concentration in the atmosphere varies systematically in concert with the progression of the ice ages (Barnola et al. 1987). The carbon goes from the atmosphere into the ocean during a glacial time, and the lowered CO 2 concentration in the atmosphere chills the planet down even more than it would cool from the ice sheets alone. There is an understandable causal link between the orbit and the ice sheets, but no easy way to imagine the orbit causing the carbon cycle to change directly. So the carbon cycle seems to be acting as a positive feedback mechanism to the orbitally driven climate changes on this time scale. Ice sheets, global temperature, and the carbon cycle form a loop of cause and effect: perturb any one of these and the others will respond. The result over the glacial cycles is that the change in global temperature was about twice as strong because of the amplifying effect of the carbon cycle. Notice that the character of the carbon cycle has changed, from calming and stabilizing the climate of the Earth on million-\'ad year time scales to amplifying climate changes driven by wobbles in Earth\'92s orbit on time scales of tens of thousands of years.\
\
One explanation for the CO 2 cycles that would account for at least the direction of the response is based on the solubility of CO 2 in water. Cooler water can hold more CO 2 than warm water can, so when the Earth cools down, more CO 2 would dissolve in the cooler ocean. However, as will be described in detail in chapter 3, the CO 2 cycles are stronger than can be explained by this mechanism alone. In fact, it\'92s not clear what drives the glacial CO 2 cycles. The glacial cycles are shorter than the response time scale for the weathering CO 2 thermostat, so it is as if, in a house, an intermittent sunbeam coming in a window warms the place up a bit, then is blocked, allowing the house to cool faster than the furnace can control the temperature. The slow response time of the furnace and thermostat allows shorter deviations from the set-\'ad point temperature. The funny thing about the carbon cycle is that the same carbon-\'ad cycle machinery both stabilizes the climate (on million-\'ad year time scales) and perturbs it (on glacial cycle time scales), as if the carbon cycle were fighting with itself. It would be analogous to some erratic fault in the furnace, driving the house to warm up and cool down, while the thermostat tries to control the temperature of the house by regulating the furnace as best it can. Time to call the furnace guy!\
\
\
Origins and Inventories of Fossil Fuels \
\
Coal is the most abundant fossil fuel, holding roughly fifty times more carbon than either of the other two forms of fossil fuel, oil and natural gas. The organic carbon in coal comes from plant material, mostly moss, deposited in standing-\'ad water swamps where it was protected from degradation by being cut off from the oxygen in the air. Peat from freshwater swamps tends to be cleaner than brackish or saltwater swamp remains because sea salt contains sulfate (SO 42\'96 ), which is reduced to sulfide (H 2 S) in the anaerobic conditions of the swamp. Unless it is captured at the power plant, the sulfur winds up as the dominant source of acidity in acid rain. Sulfide deposits in coal also tend to be rich in mercury (Hg), making coal combustion the leading source of mercury in the environment. Mature coal is essentially pure carbon. The hydrogen and oxygen that were originally associated with the carbon in the biomolecules were driven off by extended cooking in the subsurface Earth, at temperatures of ca. 300\'b0C for tens of millions of years. With a chemical formula C n , the oxidation state of the carbon in the coal is about zero. This is less reduced than oil (CH 3 (CH 2 ) n CH 3 ) or natural gas, which is mostly methane (CH 4 ). Because it involves the transfer of fewer electrons, the combustion of coal delivers less energy per carbon than from the combustion of other forms of fossil fuels. Oil and most natural gas originate from the remains of microscopic algae in the ocean, the phytoplankton. Usually their organic carbon is deposited in very low abundance, diluted by other material such as CaCO 3 , silica (SiO 2 ), and clay minerals that originate on land. Under particular circumstances sediments can accumulate that contain much higher concentrations of organic carbon. Oil source rocks typically contain 3\'96 10% organic carbon by weight, and they are relatively rare, typically only a few meters thick but extending long distances horizontally. Their upper and lower boundaries are sharp, indicating that some factor, such as the oxygen content of the water, changed suddenly to turn carbon preservation on or off. Oil forms when the source rocks are cooked to the right temperature. If the stew is overcooked, the result is natural gas. The oil or gas, in order to be harvestable, has to migrate through pores or cracks in the solid Earth, collecting together in a trap that must also exist, preventing the fluids from migrating out of the solid Earth entirely. Because of the special circumstances required, there is much less oil and gas available to harvest than coal, and the distributions of both oil and gas are very spotty. Most of the world\'92s oil is found in the Middle East, and about half of the world\'92s natural gas. Most of the rest of the natural gas is in Russia. Methane, as the most reduced form of carbon, delivers more energy per carbon atom than either oil or coal. Methane also burns more cleanly than coal, releasing fewer pollutants such as mercury, sulfur, and aerosols (droplets in the air). Methane is expensive to transport long distances, so the price of natural gas varies a lot, depending on the distance of the consumer from the gas\'92s origin. Gases expand to fill or escape their containers, unlike liquids and solids, which can be transported in unpressurized tankers. Natural gas can be either compressed (CNG), usually in cylinders that look like scuba tanks, or liquid natural gas (LNG), which takes energy and serious equipment to produce from gas. The condensation temperature for methane (\'96161\'b0C) is much lower than for its higher-\'adC cousins, propane (\'9643\'b0C) and butane (\'960.6\'b0C). Methane is produced from organic carbon buried in sediments. Microorganisms called archaea, the most primitive form of life on Earth, produce methane as a by-\'ad product of fermentation. Fermentation releases energy, which archaea use to drive their metabolisms. If the organic carbon is heated, methane can form spontaneously without any biological help (see box 5.3, \'93Methanogenesis Chemistry\'94). Adding up the total inventories of the fossil fuels is a bit tricky because we\'92re interested in the total amount of each that might ultimately be recoverable, including finds yet to be made and fuels that cannot yet be extracted with currently available technology. There are also fuzzy definitions, especially of \'93oil,\'94 which lead to much larger estimates of supply if we start to include less traditional forms such as oil shales and tar sands. With these caveats, the canonical assumption among carbon cycle modelers is that there is about 5,000 Gton C available as coal, and perhaps 200 Gton C each of oil and gas. An authoritative source, a bit dated, is Rogner 1997. Compare these with the carbon inventories in the natural carbon cycle in box 1.2, \'93Reservoirs of Carbon.\'94 The industry unit for oil is the barrel. Each barrel contains about 100 kg of carbon, or about 8,000 moles. The latest British Petroleum estimate for the amount of oil left in the ground is 1,258 billion barrels, which is about 125 Gton C. Natural gas is sold in units of volume\'97 cubic feet or cubic meters. Because a gas is compressible, the gas is specified to be at a \'93standard temperature and pressure\'94 of 25\'b0C and one atmosphere of pressure. Under these conditions, one mole of any gas takes up about 22.4 liters, which is 0.0224 cubic meters, or about 0.8 cubic feet. The inventory of natural gas according to British Petroleum is 185 trillion cubic meters, which can be converted into Gton through the following equation:\
185 \'d7 10 12 m 3 \'d7 (1 mole C/0.0224 m 3 ) \'d7 (12 g C/mole) \'d7 (Gton/10 = 100 Gton C as gas. 15 g)\
\
\
Natural gas is also tabulated in units of energy content, for example joules or BTU (British thermal units). A cubic foot contains about 1,030 BTU of energy. The current price of natural gas is a few dollars per million BTU. This can be converted to a value per cubic meter with the following equation: (1,030 BTU/1 ft 3 ) \'d7 ($2/10 6 BTU) \'d7 (35 ft 3 /m 3 ) = $0.07/m 3 . A BTU is nearly equivalent to a kilojoule (the conversion factor is 1.06). A dollar buys about 5 \'d7 10 8 joules of energy in the form of natural gas. For comparison, the cost of petroleum is about $3.00 per gallon in the United States, yielding about 5 \'d7 10 7 joule per dollar, ten times more expensive. Coal is cheaper, yielding about 8 \'d7 10 8 joules per dollar. The cost of electricity is about $0.05 per kilowatt-\'ad hour, which can be converted to the same units to 7 \'d7 10 7 joules/dollar, more expensive than raw coal or gas but about half the cost of gasoline.\
\
\
================================================\
\
CH 2: The Stable Geologic Carbon Cycle\
\
================================================\
\
The processes described in this chapter are \'adprobably irrelevant for political consideration of climate change on human time scales. The stabilizing mechanisms of the carbon cycle simply work too slowly to make much difference on the time scales of our lives, say the coming century to the year 2100. However, the irrelevance of the slow carbon cycle to the immediate future is an important point, since ultimately the global warming climate event will last for as long as it takes these slow processes to act. The geologic carbon cycle also sets the stage for carbon cycle gymnastics on faster, and perhaps more immediately relevant, time scales. \
\
On geologic time scales, the carbon cycle has much to do with the eerie stability of conditions on the surface of the Earth. British geochemist James Lovelock writes that life on Earth functions as a single organism, able to regulate the conditions on Earth the way a person regulates his internal temperature or chemical composition. \'93Homeostasis by and for the biosphere\'94 was how he put it in the title of an early article (Lovelock 1974). \
\
To some extent, Lovelock\'92s Gaia hypothesis is more a philosophical definition than a refutable scientific proposition. Lovelock looks for cooperation and mutual benefit in the tasks that organisms perform\'97 for example, animals excreting nitrogen waste in a biologically available form (urea, NH 2 CONH 2 ) rather than in an unusable form such as nitrogen gas. We know that organisms compete with each other, so a state of cooperation between organisms to complete their Gaian housekeeping chores would appear to be unstable to invasion by some selfish beast who would prefer to keep all of his metabolic energy for perpetuating his own kind. \
\
Regardless of where one draws the boundaries between organisms in the biosphere or what one thinks about competition, the stability that Lovelock pointed to in the biosphere, the apparent homeostasis, is very real, and to the extent that we understand it, it is largely due to the working of the carbon cycle.\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
}