{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2638
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 IBMPlexSerif-Regular;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww15360\viewh9600\viewkind0
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs36 \cf0 \
Global Climate Models\
\
\'91coupler\'92\
\
We\'92ve so far learned about energy balance models, carbon cycle models, and 1-D atmospheric column models. Now we\'92re ready to learn about the big and complex 3-D global climate models. These are the workhorse models of climate science. Most of the climate science that relies on climate models uses these kinds of models. These are also the models that are used in nearly all of the projections of the impacts of global warming. \
\
The major goal of global climate modeling is to accurately represent how the major processes of the climate system work. To do this, the atmosphere, land, and ocean have to be divided up and approximated by a finite number of grid cells. Let\'92s see what this looks like for a some piece of ocean and land not very different from somewhere like the coast of California.\
\
FIG: 5.1 Neelin \
Caption: A section of the grid for a typical atmospheric general circulation model. \
\
In panel (a) we see that the atmosphere overlaying the land is divided up into rectangular grid cells that follow the topography below them. In a climate model, this grid would continue globally. For each grid cell, there is a single value of each variable that the model uses, such as temperature, that represents the average over the area of the grid cell. Panel (b) shows what a level taken out of this larger grid looks like. Panel (c) indicates that climate quantities (for example, mass, energy, moisture) can move between grid cells. This kind of division of the atmosphere and ocean into grid cells means that the model can only approximate the continuous underlying motions of reality.\
\
Some details about the grid: the vertical coordinate is a pressure coordinate modified so that it follows the topography (so it\'92s not actually height); the grid spacing is not constant in the vertical direction and usually not constant in the horizontal either&mdash;this is because some locations need higher vertical or horizontal resolution in order to model them well. \
\
\
\
However, the grid is only the scaffolding of a climate model. More important than the scaffolding is what is built on it. A climate model is built out of equations that describe the phenomena of Earth\'92s four climate realms: atmosphere, ocean, cryosphere, and biosphere. Each realm has its own set of equations that describe the phenomena within that realm. For example, the atmosphere has equations that describe the motion of the air, the formation of clouds, precipitation, the absorption and emission of radiation, and the chemical reactions that take place in the air. And each realm is connected to the other realms through a \'91coupler\'92, see below. \
\
FIG: climate realms\
\
The computer code that climate models are written is modular: many of the pieces can be mixed and matched to run different kinds of simulations. For example, you can run a climate model simulation that only uses the atmosphere and its equations; or you could run a simulation that includes only the atmosphere and ocean, and no interactive biosphere or cryosphere.\
\
What do the equations of each realm look like? Written below are all the differential equations that are necessary to describe the flow of dry air (so not including water vapor or clouds), called the \'91Navier-Stokes equations\'92.\
\
The mass continuity equation:\
\\[ \\frac\{\\partial \\rho\}\{\\partial t\} +\\nabla\\cdot(\\rho \\vec\{v\})=0\\]\
The momentum equation:\
\\[\\frac\{\\partial \\vec\{v\}\}\{\\partial t\}+(\\vec\{v\}\\cdot\\nabla)\\vec\{v\} = -\\frac\{\\nabla p\}\{\\rho\}+\\nu\\nabla^2\\vec\{v\}+\\mathcal\{F\}\\]\
The thermodynamic equation:\
\\[\\frac\{\\partial \\theta\}\{\\partial t\}+\\vec\{v\}\\cdot\\nabla\\theta=\\frac\{\\theta\}\{c_pT\}Q\\]\
The equation of state:\
\\[\\rho = p\\frac\{R\}\{\\overline\{M\}\}T\\]\
\
It\'92s not important for our purposes here to understand these equations fully. Just notice that they include variables like velocity \\(\\vec\{v\}\\), density \\(\\rho\\), pressure \\(p\\), \'91potential temperature\'92 \\(\\theta\\), and temperature \\(T\\) (among others) and that these variables are functions of time \\(t\\). There are a similar set of equations that describe the flow of ocean water. Such equations of motion can be derived from fundamental laws of physics and are universally used in all climate models. \
\
There are different competing sets of equations used for phenomena like the formation of clouds, the growth of plants, and the formation of sea ice. People who develop climate models use slightly different equations for such phenomena depending on the level of detail they want to include or if they think certain equations better capture the phenomena they are working on. Many climate models have been developed over several decades and equations are added or modified over time.\
\
How are these equations actually put to use? The equations are linked together at each grid cell and solved numerically by a computer. For an example of this, consider a simple wave of pressure as a function of longitude (\\(x\\)), below.\
\
FIG: Fig 5.7 finite difference figure\
Caption: Example of finite differencing of a pressure field as a function of longitude \\(x\\) and of the finite-difference pressure gradient at one of the points.\
\
The line represents the dimension of longitude and the dots represent grid cells. The value of pressure at each grid cell is the function \\(p(x)\\). If we needed to compute the momentum equation, which we saw above, for this pressure field, one part of that equation is \\(\\nabla p\\) which is equal to \\(\\frac\{\\partial p\}\{\\partial x\}\\) for this one dimensional example. So we need to know \\(\\frac\{\\partial p\}\{\\partial x\}\\) for all of the grid points. This can be calculated by finding the slope at each grid cell using neighboring grid cell values. One simple way of computing the slope would be to compute the following equation for a given grid point \\(i\\) and grid size \\(\\Delta x\\),\
\
\\[ \\frac\{\\partial p\}\{\\partial x\} \\approx \\frac\{p_\{i+1\}-p_\{i-1\}\}\{2\\Delta x\}\\; .\\]\
\
which approximates the pressure gradient at point \\(i\\). The other parts of the momentum equation, as well as other differential equations describing other variables, would be solved in a similar way. \
\
Again, it\'92s not important for our purposes to understand everything about this process. What\'92s important to know is that there are sets of connected equations that describe how the climate system works. These equations are solved numerically by a computer on a grid that represents Earth\'92s atmosphere, ocean, and land. And this numerical solution evolves in time.\
\
The numerical output of the model from the computer, when plotted, looks just like what you might see if you could watch Earth\'92s weather and ocean circulation from space. Here\'92s an example showing only the variable of atmospheric water vapor over time,\
\
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=btfg4szYGMo\
\
A single simulation from a modern climate model includes hundreds of variables, each of which could be plotted and turned into a little movie like this example.\
\
As you may be able to intuitively guess from the figures above, having a smaller sized grid can significantly improve the climate model simulation. Higher resolution allows you to resolve smaller scale processes. Relatedly, it allows you to have greater accuracy in the numerical solutions to the differential equations. The figure below compares two grid resolutions, the bottom resolution is typical of a global climate model from about 2010 while the top has a resolution that is 10 times higher. \
\
FIG: model-resolution-neelin.png Neelin, <i>Climate Change and Climate Modeling</i>, 2011.\
Caption: The topography of North America shown at two different resolutions. The main lower resolution is 2.0 degrees latitude by 2.0 degrees longitude. Two degrees of latitude corresponds to slightly over 200 km. The high resolution case at 0.2 degrees corresponds to slightly over 20 km in latitudinal grid size.\
\
\
Given that the topography looks so much more impressive at high resolution, why aren\'92t climate models run at even higher resolution? The main reason is computational time (which is proportional to how much it costs), which increases dramatically for high resolution. Climate models can only be run on computer clusters or \'91supercomputers\'92, so you have to pay for all the computational time you use on the computer system. Computational time for a simulation can be broken down into the following parts:\
\
Computational time = (computer time per operation) \'d7 (operations per equation)\
\'d7 (number of equations per grid box) \'d7 (number of grid boxes)\
\'d7 (number of time steps per simulation)\
\
where an operation is, for example, a single multiplication or addition; several operations have to occur in calculating each of the terms of each of the equations for each variable in each grid box. If you increase the horizontal resolution of the model you also have to increase the vertical resolution, as well as increase the time step of the calculations to keep things numerically accurate and stable. So increasing the resolution by, for example, a factor of 2, ends up increasing the total computational time by 2 for the number of grid cells in latitude multiplied by 2 in longitude, multiplied by 2 in the vertical, and multiplied by 2 in time, so \\(2^4=16\\) more computational time. \
\
If the computational time for a simulation is so long that a climate scientist cannot wait for it to be completed, the cost becomes irrelevant. To give you an idea of the time involved, if the climate model simulation is only for the atmosphere, about 20 years of climate can be simulated in about a day or two. Simulations that include both an atmosphere and ocean take about 2-3 times as long. It\'92s fairly common to run simulations that take a couple weeks or a month to complete. Simulations that take more than a couple months time are usually seen as impractical to carry out, though some people or organizations do run long simulations if they have a lot of time and computational resources at their command.\
\
What happens if there are climate processes that are much smaller than the scale of the grid cells? Such as, for example, cloud formation and convection (below)?\
\
FIG: Tapio Schneider\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa420\partightenfactor0
\cf0 Important physical processes that are too small to fit on a model\'92s grid are included by using statistical theories called \'91parameterizations\'92. Parameterizations represent, for example, the effects of radiation, turbulence, and cloud formation. They are physically based theories that predict statistics. For example, instead of trying to model individual clouds, a cloud parameterization determines the collective effect of many clouds that would live within the area of a grid cell.\
Let\'92s look more closely at another example: the turbulent mixing of air and moisture at the boundary between the ocean and atmosphere. A schematic of this process is shown below.\
FIG: Neeling verticle mixing\
Caption: Schematic of turbulent mixing of air and water vapor at the ocean surface. Small dots represent the amount of water vapor in the air, swirls and black arrows represent turbulent air motions, and the gray arrow indicates the average direction of the blowing surface wind. \
We can then take this boxed-in area and zoom in further:\
FIG: mixing detail\
Caption: Vertical mixing for specific humidity, q, and of the surface flux of moisture by evaporation, showing the processes to be parameterized on a grid with \\(k\\) levels. Moisture at each level is denoted \\(q_k\\) . The net flux across the face of the grid box at level \\(z_\{k\uc0\u8722 1/2\}\\) that in reality would occur by smaller-scale motions acting on the gradient in \\(q\\) must be parameterized in numerical models. Neelin, <i>Climate Change and Climate Modeling</i>, 2011.\
In an ideal world we could model this turbulence directly, modeling all the tiny turbulent eddies of air mixing moisture into the atmosphere from the ocean. This happens on very small scales though and is impossible to model directly. Instead we can model the flux of moisture into the atmosphere by breaking the interface down into two layers (\'91level k\'92 and \'91level k-1\'92); we can then parameterize the moisture flux, F, with a simple equation. The higher moisture air, \'91high q\'92, will mix with the lower moisture air, \'91lower q\'92, according to the difference in moisture between the two layers\
\\[ F=K\\frac\{q_k-q_\{k-1\}\}\{\\Delta z\}\\; ,\\]\
where \\(\\Delta z\\) is the height difference between the two layers and \\(K\\) is a numerical value that depends on the strength of the wind (the big gray arrows) and is determined by lab measurements.\
Of necessity, climate models contain many parameterizations such as these. Some parameterizations are very well-studied with quite a bit of confidence in their representation in models, while other parameterizations are less well understood (e.g., parameterizations of soils, plants, and clouds). Also, changing some parameterizations can have a bigger impact on climate than changing others. For example, changing cloud parameterizations tend to have bigger impacts on climate than changing soil parameterizations; the uncertainties involved in cloud parameterizations is mostly what causes the relatively large uncertainties in cloud feedbacks.\
\
Model Evaluation\
All climate models are evaluated for their accuracy. Most major models are also continuously in development, with climate model developers seeking to improve the models in different ways. Just like in the development of computer operating systems, climate models are given version numbers as they evolve, along with short names useful for identifying them in papers, conferences, and model inter-comparison projects (for example, one of the models linked to above, the Community Earth System Model, is known as CESM). Model versions are evaluated internally by the group of developers and also evaluated externally by users of the models. \
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 Models are evaluated in many different ways. For example, they are tested for their ability to maintain energy balance over time and their ability to simulate precipitation and global mean temperature. The figure below evaluates the tropical precipitation of climate models that were a part of the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 6 (CMIP6). The top panel shows observed precipitation based on satellite measurements, the middle panel shows the average of all models in CMIP6, and the bottom panel shows the difference between the models and observations, called the \'91bias\'92.\
\
FIG: ITCZ bias\
Caption: Long-term annual mean precipitation (units of mm/day) over the tropics in observations (top), climate models (middle), and the climate model bias (bottom).\
\
We can see that the models get the general pattern of precipitation right: it is high in a narrow band near the equator and it has a horseshoe shape over the western Pacific ocean.  However the models\'92 precipitation tends to be too symmetric around the equator and a little too far away from the equator in the Pacific and Atlantic oceans; this shows up as the red-colored biases in the bottom panel. In particular, the bias highlighted by the dashed black lines over the Pacific and Atlantic oceans is known as the \'91double intertropical convergence zone bias\'92. This is one of the largest and most stubbornly persistent biases in climate models.\
\
Another of many tests often performed is an evaluation of the models\'92 global mean temperature over time. The figure below shows how a very wide range of climate models do in following the observed global mean temperature from 1850 to 2020. The observed estimates of global mean temperature are in black in both panels and each model simulation is given a different colored line; the average of all models is shown with a thick red line in the top panel and thick red and blue lines in the bottom panel.\
\
FIG: IPCC Chapter 3\
Eyring, et al., <i>Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change</i>, (2021).\
\
However, given that the people who develop the climate models know what the historical global mean temperature has been and that they test their models against it internally, the figure above isn\'92t really an independent test of the models.(cite: Hourdin, et al., <i>The Art and Science of Climate Model Tuning</i>, (2017).)\
\
An independent test is to evaluate temperature projections that were made in the past. Hausfather et al., (2019) did this for every major projection of global mean temperature made by models since 1970. In the figure below they show global mean temperature projections (colored lines) versus the observed global mean temperature (black line), where the projections are plotted starting in the year after their publication.\
\
FIG: Hausfather et al., <i>Evaluating the Performance of Past Climate Model Projections</i>, (2019).\
\
We can see that the models are generally quite accurate in their projections of global mean temperature.\
\
If your climate model has a problem, how do you fix it? You\'92ll need to modify the equations, either using fundamentally new equations or by adjusting the numerical values in the parameterizations (e.g., the value of \\(K\\) in the parameterization we discussed in the previous section). Adjusting the parameterizations is called model \'91tuning\'92 and is necessary for any statistical or complex model in any field of science. The size and complexity of climate models means that there are many parameterizations that could be tuned, but in practice a relatively small subset are usually adjusted. The most frequently tuned parameterizations are those dealing with clouds. The values are adjusted within the uncertainty ranges of the parameter values and the results of the tuning are evaluated against a wide range of observed climate quantities.<label for="ref1" class="margin-toggle sidenote-number"></label><input type="checkbox" id="ref1" class="margin-toggle"/><span class="sidenote">Hourdin et al., <i>The Art and Science of Climate Model Tuning</i>, (2017).</span>\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa420\partightenfactor0
\cf0 Model Uses\
-General climate science questions\
-Detection and attribution\
-Global warming projections\
Climate models are used for understanding a huge variety of climate-related phenomena, not just those directly connected to global warming. Scientists use climate models to understand things like: the circulation of the atmosphere and ocean, the behavior of ice sheets, the nature of chemical reactions in the atmosphere and ocean, the interaction of plants with climate, the character of climates in the geologic past, and what climates might be like on planets and moons in our solar system or elsewhere in our galaxy.\
\
\
\
\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 5.1.3 Resolutionandcomputationalcost\
\
The term resolution is used to describe the degree of refinement of a climate model grid. A model with a small grid size is termed fine resolution or high resolution, while one with a large grid size is coarse resolution. This is consistent with terminology, for instance, for microscopes or photography where high resolution images can distinguish smaller-scale features.\
\
Figure 5.3 uses the topographic height for the North American region to illustrate the effects of resolution on a familiar example. The topography is contrasted for a larger grid size (lower resolution) typical of a climate model and a smaller grid size (higher resolution) typical of a weather prediction model. The high resolution case is shown as a blowup of the topography over a subregion, first, so that it can be seen more clearly, and second, because this resolution is also typical of a regional climate model, discussed further in section 5.4. Much more detail can be seen in the high resolution case while the lower resolution case captures the broad outline of the main mountain ranges. The grid size of 2 degrees in latitude and longitude used to illustrate the lower resolution case is typical of the most common resolution for the climate models used in the IPCC (2007) report. Some coarse resolution models of roughly 5 by 4 degree latitude\'96longitude grid were used, while the highest resolution models had grids between 1 and 1.5 degrees in each direction. Two degrees of latitude corresponds to slightly over 200 km; the high resolution case at 0.2 degrees corresponds to slightly over 20 km in latitudinal grid size. Typical grid sizes get smaller every few years, as outlined below.\
\
\
\
5.1.4 Anoceanmodelandocean\'96atmospherecoupling\
\
Figure 5.4 shows a cross-section through a typical ocean model grid. The levels are more closely spaced (as little as 10 m thick) near the surface to resolve surface current effects. They remain quite closely spaced through the upper ocean to resolve the thermocline, but gradually increase to a vertical grid size of several hundred meters. In this example, there are 27 levels, similar to what has been used in many El Ni\'f1o models. The ocean grid size shown here is 100 km. Much of the work on global change has been done with models of much coarser resolution in both horizontal and vertical. However, a 100 km grid size still cannot be considered high resolution because the typical ocean eddy at midlatitudes, such as those seen in Figure 2.4, is about 50 km. Thus a model must have a grid size substantially smaller than this to be \'93eddy resolving.\'94\
\
The approximation to the topography appears crude in the ocean model. Sloping grid cells are used in some models but the approximation shown should be viewed in perspective. If the entire Pacific basin were shown, for example, the domain in the figure would be only about one-twentieth of the width. And the total depth of the figure is only about one- twentieth of the width of a single grid box. The island shown is about the size of Hawaii. Many smaller islands would be omitted from the ocean model, or would be approximated as sea mounts, since the base would be resolved but the narrower top portion would be smaller than the grid size.\
\
The lower levels of an atmospheric model are also shown in Figure 5.4, for an atmo- spheric model grid size of 2 degrees of longitude. It is common for the ocean model to have smaller grid size than the atmosphere for two reasons. First, some climatically important features in the ocean have smaller scale (such as equatorial upwelling and equa- torial jets, western boundary currents like the Gulf stream and ocean eddies). Second, ocean models are slightly less computationally expensive per grid cell because atmospheric radiation schemes, cumulus convection parameterizations, etc. add considerably to the computation.\
\
Because of the difference in grid size between the atmosphere model and ocean model, some care must be taken in interpolating between the grids at the surface, apportioning the fluxes properly among the grid cells. Notice also that the atmospheric model, with its coarser grid, treats the island in Figure 5.4 as essentially flat, and has a slight offset in where the topography begins to affect the atmospheric grid at the coast. These are details as far as large-scale climate simulation is concerned, but worth being aware of if trying to apply climate model results to a regional problem.\
\
Figure 5.5 shows a single atmospheric column, one grid cell wide in the horizontal, and the ocean grid cells below it, expanded to illustrate the coupling effects across the ocean\'96atmosphere interface. The various energy fluxes are illustrated for one of the ocean grid cells, and the wind stress for the other. The amount of solar radiation reaching the ocean surface depends on atmospheric variables such as clouds and thus is calculated in the atmosphere model. The solar radiation penetrates into the upper few ocean levels. Exchange of sensible heat and latent heat (evaporation) occur between the uppermost ocean level and lowest atmospheric level. Infrared radiation is exchanged between the uppermost ocean level and all levels of the atmosphere. Near-surface heating is carried down by mixing in the ocean, which is parameterized to depend on atmospheric wind stress, ocean surface currents, etc. Because sea surface temperature (SST) remains relatively constant over a few atmospheric model time steps, whereas atmospheric variables tend to have more variation, SST is typically passed to the atmospheric model where all the heat fluxes are then calculated. Wind stress is calculated in the atmosphere and passed down to the ocean model, acting as a force on the uppermost level. Mixing effects then redistribute this force downward to accelerate the levels below.\
\
\
5.1.5 Landsurface,snow,iceandvegetation\
\
In addition to the atmosphere and ocean model equations presented in Chapter 3 a number of other processes must be included in climate models. One important component is a land surface model. Land surface models are often run as a subcomponent of an atmospheric model since land quantities interact with atmospheric variables on short time scales. The variables typically include: land surface temperature; soil moisture, which depends on precipitation and evapotranspiration; and snow cover. The land surface temperature equation is essentially governed by energy balance at the surface, since land stores little heat. For both this and the soil moisture equation, evapotranspiration must be calculated, which depends on the properties of the vegetation in each grid box.\
\
It is common to define a number of land surface types. For each surface type sev- eral properties are specified, including quantities related to vegetation type. Depending on the complexity of the model these might include rooting depth of the vegetation, the leaf area index, which gives the typical vertical thickness of the leaves in the vegetation cover, and parameters specifying how much soil moisture the soil can absorb before it sat- urates and runoff becomes strong. Because such land surface models depend so strongly on vegetation, they are sometimes termed biophysical land surface models. An example of the land surface types used in one land surface model, the Biosphere\'96Atmosphere Trans- fer Scheme (BATS), is given in Figure 5.6 with their geographical distribution on a 0.5 by 0.5 degree grid.1 The land surface types also affect the drag coefficient felt by near- surface winds (rough surfaces like forests tend to produce more drag). Albedo depends on surface type, but is also affected by such things as snow cover. Some models now include interactive vegetation models in which properties of the vegetation, such as leaf area index, are calculated as a function of time, depending on soil moisture, temperature, insolation, etc.\
\
A snow cover model might have one to several layers of variable depth. Snow coverage and depth depends on atmospheric inputs such as snowfall, temperature, surface radiation and low-level atmospheric temperature and moisture. Energy balances within the snow layers determine melting and sublimation. For models with state-of-the-art treatment of water at the land surface, the soil moisture and snow cover equations are linked to land surface hydrology model which includes calculation of river runoff by catchment basin.\
\
A sea ice model would typically include the fraction of areas of open water (known as \'93leads\'94) within the sea ice region, ice thickness, ice surface temperature and ice velocity. Sea ice models are run in close connection with the ocean model. The melting and freezing of sea ice produces or removes fresh water that is input to the ocean salinity equation, and the presence of sea ice strongly affects ocean\'96atmosphere heat transfer. Atmospheric inputs strongly affect energy balance in the sea ice layers, and winds drive much of the ice motion.\
\
5.1.6 Summaryofprincipalclimatemodelequations\
\
In Chapter 3, the equations of motion used in atmosphere and ocean models were exam- ined, and additional processes for land surface and sea ice were summarized in section 5.1.5. Table 5.1 lists the main equations of a climate model, with cross-references to the equations in Chapter 3. The exact form of the equation used in a particular implementation of an atmosphere or ocean model might vary somewhat from the form given in Chapter 3, but the principle would be the same. The equations with time derivatives are known as prognostic equations because they give the change in variables one time step into the future. They thus have particular significance and are noted in Table 5.1. The other equations (diagnostic equations) give relations among variables at a given moment. They can thus sometimes be combined, eliminating one variable (e.g. hydrostatic equation combined with the ideal gas law to eliminate density). The sea surface height equation in the ocean and the surface pres- sure equation in the atmosphere are special cases of the continuity equation (see Chapter 3 endnotes 9 and 10) but require separate treatment numerically. Sea-level height was treated in a simpler approximation in Chapter 4 in a one-active-layer upper-ocean model; ocean GCMs use a more complete equation.\
\
There can be a number of different processes that must be computed for each of the equations listed in Table 5.1. For instance, one time step of the atmospheric temperature equation requires computation of the complex radiative transfer calculations and all of the calculations for the parameterization of moist convective heating seen in Figure 5.2. The equations shown provide the overall structure which would be common to most climate models. Differences among models might include the degree of complexity of the param- eterized processes that go into these equations. For some applications, not all of these equations would be used. For instance, sea ice might be specified from observations instead of calculated interactively. This works fine for studying tropical climate variability such as ENSO, but would not be appropriate for global warming simulation.\
\
As climate models develop, it is common to include additional equations beyond the standard set given in Table 5.1. For instance, in the atmosphere, equations for aerosol trans- port, cloud water, cloud ice or concentration of particular gases; in the ocean, equations for concentrations of tracers (compounds whose concentration can help verify the model sim- ulation against observations) or biogeochemistry equations. When the additional processes involve entire additional model components, one speaks of the model as a \'93climate system model\'94 as described in section 5.1.7.\
\
5.5 Climate simulations and climate drift\
\
Once one has a climate model constructed, there are a number of things that must be done even before the most interesting experiments can begin. The time integration of the model equations by the time-stepping procedures described in section 5.2 are called integrations, runs, simulations or experiments (all four terms are approximately equivalent though with slightly different emphasis). Each run can proceed from any reasonable set of initial con- ditions, that is, a set of initial values of all the main variables (the ones that occur in the equations labelled \'93prognostic\'94 in Table 5.1). However, when the model is first run, it takes a considerable period of model simulated time before it arrives at a state similar to the long-term mean. This is referred to as the model spin up. Two examples of model runs are shown in Figure 5.16. One run starts from some arbitrarily chosen initial conditions (that happen to be colder than observed). When a model is first run, the atmosphere might be started from constant temperature and no wind, while the ocean is started from a simple vertical profile that has no spatial variations and no currents. The model then responds to the solar forcing, warming at the equator, cooling at the poles and spinning up winds and currents. Eventually it reaches a simulated climate that resembles the observed. The initial part of the spin up, involving the atmosphere and upper ocean, tends to go fairly quickly. The atmosphere alone would spin up within a year, the global-scale features of the upper ocean in decades. To get the deep ocean reasonably close to equilibrium requires many centuries or a millennium of simulated time. The model then reaches a statistical equilibrium climate which can be defined by a long-term average. Natural variations about the long-term mean occur (including El Ni\'f1o fluctuations caused by weather noise, decadal variations, etc.), but if the model does not have any change in the externally specified conditions (such as the solar input and the trace gases), then the long-term climate will be fairly stable. Some climate variability occurs on centennial or longer time scales as well, so even averages between different centuries will have some differences, but these tend to be relatively small compared with the signals we will be examining in global warming runs.\
\
The second run shown in Figure 5.16 begins from an estimate of the observed climate. A climate model requires values of every variable at every grid point in its initial state, so to achieve the estimate of the observed, special procedures are often used to fill gaps in the data. The spin-up process in this case does not involve large changes, but it still occurs because the model adjusts toward its own equilibrium climate which is not exactly the same as the observed. This systematic model error is often referred to as climate drift, because when started from observations, the model \'93drifts\'94 slowly toward its equilibrium state. The term climate drift also refers to the steady state result of this adjustment (much as a \'93snow drift\'94 is the end result of drifting snow). Reducing this model error is one of the main activities of climate model research centers and it is a painstaking process. One problem is that an error in one part of the climate system tends to create errors in other parts of the climate system and these can feed back on each other. It is very common to find that the cause of an error in one variable is related to some subtle aspect of a process in some other part of the system, or even in another region.\
\
Can a model that has some error in its simulation of current climate be used to model changes in climate? To some approximation, yes. One argument is that if a model gets the current climate correct to within a small percent error, when a change in forcing due to greenhouse gases is applied, one might expect to simulate the change to within a small percent error. There is some plausibility to this, but caution must be used as well. When applying the results of a climate model, one should carefully examine the simulation of the current climatology for the relevant variables and region, as errors in the climate definitely can impact estimates of climate change.\
\
\
5.6.2 Climatemodelsimulationofclimatology\
\
An even more difficult test for a climate model is obtaining a realistic simulation when the ocean, atmosphere and other climate model components such as sea ice are coupled together. As discussed in section 5.4, when ocean and atmospheric models were first coupled, the typical behavior was to drift to a simulated climate similar to observed, but with significant error. This can include alterations of the spatial patterns of climate features like the tropical convection zones, a few degrees C of error in SST and so on. This can occur even if an atmospheric model produces a reasonable simulation when tested with observed SST. If the atmospheric model has slight errors in a parameterized process, this leads to an error in the surface energy flux. For instance, an error in the parameterized cloud cover might allow tens of W m\uc0\u8722 2 too much solar radiation to reach the surface in a certain region. When observed SST is specified, no ocean feedback on this error is permitted, but for the coupled system, the ocean will warm, in turn affecting the cloudiness, winds, etc. Slight errors thus feed back upon each other in the coupled system.\
O\
ver the past decade or so, modeling groups have engaged in a painstaking process of evaluating sources of error and attempting to reduce each in turn. As a result, there are now a number of coupled climate models with very modest climate drift and quite reasonable simulations of observed current climatology. Climate models traditionally receive version numbers as they evolve, along with short form names useful for identifying them in papers, conferences, model intercomparison projects and funding proposals. We will examine in this section examples from the NCAR CCSM3 (defined in section 5.6.1); from a well-tested model version known as HadCM3 from the Hadley Centre, the main British climate model- ing group; from the Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory in Princeton (GFDL_CM2.1); from the Max Planck Institute for Meteorology in Hamburg, Germany (MPI_ECHAM5 or ECHAM5); and from the Australian climate center (CSIRO_MK3.0).\
\
Figure 5.18 shows a comparison between precipitation from the atmospheric compo- nent of CCSM3 (forced by observed SST, using the 4 mm day\uc0\u8722 1 contour from Figure 5.17 and that from the fully coupled CCSM3 in which the ocean and atmosphere have approx- imately equilibrated to the model simulation of the climate state over recent years, for specified estimates of greenhouse gases, etc. (known as a \'93twentieth-century run\'94).6\
\
The 4 mm day\uc0\u8722 1 contours from Figure 5.17 are repeated for the AMIP run and the observa- tions, and the 4 mm day\u8722 1 contour from the coupled CCSM3 simulation is added. Again, at the largest scale, the coupled model does well at capturing the overall climate features. As one examines more regional details in Figure 5.18, typically any errors in the atmospheric component alone are reflected in the coupled simulation. For instance, the winter storm tracks are too strong. A number of regional errors noted in section 5.6.1 are exacerbated in the coupled system. For instance, the SPCZ in December\'96February, which extended slightly too far into the southeastern Pacific in the atmospheric component, extends even further east across the basin in the coupled simulation. As will be shown below, this is associated with changes in SST as well. The ITCZ in the Atlantic extends too far south, across the equator, in both seasons. The Caribbean precipitation simulation is actually better in the coupled case in June\'96August. This may be just luck, or it may be that the SST in the coupled run has adjusted to compensate, for instance, for excessive heat flux taken out of the ocean in the uncoupled run. Analyzing such ocean\'96atmosphere feedbacks is one of the main challenges in improving climate model simulations.\
\
Another interesting thing to note is that the fidelity of the precipitation simulation to observations is not necessarily related to resolution. For instance, the Hadley Centre model has one of the best coupled model simulations of tropical precipitation, seen in Figure 5.19, in several regions that tend to pose problems for climate models. This is despite having a grid size of about 3.75 degrees longitude by 2.5 degrees latitude, compared with about 1.4 by 1.4 degrees in CCSM3 (almost five times as many grid points) \'96 and yet the CCSM3 tropical precipitation climatology has somewhat larger errors in certain regions. While noting that this is just one climate variable among many that one can examine, it illustrates that the climate models depend on the sum total of all their parameterizations interacting with each other and the large-scale flow. In comparing HadCM3 coupled model precipitation climatology with observations in Figure 2.13 (bearing in mind that the averaging periods are not identical), the large-scale patterns of the tropical convection zones, midlatitude storm tracks and their changes from winter to summer are very reasonably reproduced. Nonetheless, one can easily spot errors in particular regions. For instance, the Australian outback would be a very different place if the climate were really like that simulated in January. Summer monsoon convection that should be confined to the north of Australia spreads too far southward in the model. In winter, Italy is as rainy as the north of France \'96 again, a slight extension of a real climate feature creates errors at the regional scale.\
\
Figure 5.20 uses the same format as Figure 5.18 to compare precipitation simulations among several coupled models. The 4 mm day\uc0\u8722 1 contour from each model is used to give the shape of the precipitation features. This reinforces the conclusion that the models generally agree well with observations (and each other) at the large scale. Over a large portion of the plot, the models differ by what appear to be modest wiggles in the contours viewed from a global scale. However, these departures are often hundreds of kilometers (1 degree of latitude is slightly over 100 km) and can be very significant if examined at the scale of a state or a river drainage basin. In a few regions different models tend to have similar departures from the observed estimate. The winter storm tracks are all too strong; the SPCZ extends too far into the eastern Pacific in several models; and a number of models have trouble with a shifted boundary of the convection zone over the southern tropical Atlantic.\
\
We now turn to two closely related measures of surface temperature, which we show for CCSM3 and HadCM3, respectively. Figure 5.21 shows the SST climatology for the CCSM3 coupled simulation. This may be compared with the observed climatology in Figure 2.16. The large-scale features, such as the strong gradient of SST through the midlatitudes, and the east\'96west contrast in the Pacific, are clearly simulated, although as one examines details many small shifts in position or extend of these features may be noted. Midlatitude SST contours lie close to the observed, but the equatorial Pacific cold tongue extends farther west than observed, while just south of the equator the boundary between the warm pool and the cold eastern Pacific water occurs too far east. The equatorial Atlantic is too warm in December\'96February. The tropical precipitation features tend to follow the SST, so regions where the SST has errors tend also to be regions where the precipitation has errors. For instance, the excessive eastward extension of the SPCZ into the eastern Pacific and the southward displacement of the ITCZ in the Atlantic are both directly related to the SST error. The SST pattern in turn depends on the winds, the radiative feedbacks associated with clouds, and other feedbacks from the atmosphere. Thus these errors are often associated with ocean\'96atmosphere feedbacks.\
\
Figure 5.22 shows the near-surface air temperature climatology from HadCM3. Near- surface air temperature is often used in global warming studies because it changes fairly smoothly over both land and ocean. Over the ocean, near-surface air temperature tends to be rather similar in spatial pattern to SST, but about 1 to 2 
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 C cooler. Over land, the temperature of the land surface itself might change rapidly over the course of a day and between different surface types (e.g. bare ground versus vegetated area). The air temperature has less severe variations and thus is easier to measure with limited samples. The general features of the climatology are reproduced well in the HadCM3 simulation (you may compare to the SST pattern in Figure 2.16, adding a degree or so for the difference between SST and surface air temperature). The movement of the regions of warm surface temperature in the tropics with season is well captured, as is the equatorial cold tongue. The temperature gradient from tropics to polar regions is also quite well simulated. As with the precipitation, if one subtracts an estimate of the observed fields, differences up to a couple of degrees Celsius may be found regionally. Again, any slight offset of a climatological feature can lead to errors on a region by region basis. As in CCSM3, a slight over-extension of the cold tongue to the west and insufficient temperature gradient across the Pacific south of the equator may be noted. When climate modelers find regions of common error among several models, coordinated programs of observations and modeling are often organized to address the climate processes that are not well enough represented in these regions.\
\
Sea ice simulations in current climate are shown in Figure 5.23 for satellite observations and two ocean\'96atmosphere climate models. Regions that have sea ice concentration greater than 15% (i.e. more than 15% of a unit area is covered by ice) are shown for late winter and late summer, when the sea ice extent is approximately at its maximum and minimum, respectively. The models shown here do fairly well at capturing the seasonal cycle of the total area covered by sea ice, although ECHAM5 underestimates the retreat of the ice through summer, and local differences may be noted from the observations. There are some models that produce slightly larger or slightly smaller seasonal variations than observed.\
\
}