{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2636
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 FiraSans-Regular;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww16400\viewh12980\viewkind0
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs36 \cf0 \
Structure of chapter:\
- Modify energy balance model to get a greenhouse layer (Vallis)\
- Physics of photon absorption and emission: electron orbit, vibrational, rotational (mine + Pierrehumbert)\
- Radiation in planck distributions (Pierrehumbert)\
- Band saturation effect (Archer)\
\
\
An energy balance model of Earth\'92s greenhouse effect\
\
\
In the last chapter we derived an energy balance equation for a planet without an atmosphere,\
\
\\[\\frac\{S\}\{4\}(1-\\alpha)  = \\sigma T^4 \\; . \\tag\{1\}\\]\
\
Though by neglecting an atmosphere this equation gave us a global mean temperature that was far too cold (254 K) compared to Earth\'92s actual temperature (288 K). Let\'92s revise the energy balance model to add in an atmosphere and a greenhouse effect. For this revised mathematical model we\'92ll assume the following: (1) The atmosphere is completely transparent to solar radiation; (2) The atmosphere is opaque to infrared radiation so that it absorbs infrared radiation and acts like a blackbody; (3) The Earth\'92s surface and it\'92s atmospheric layer have a single average temperature, each denoted by \\(T_s\\) and \\(T_a\\). Assumptions (1) and (2) are actually fairly realistic and assumption (3) is just so that we can keep things simple.\
\
Here\'92s an illustration of this model with equations showing where the energy comes from and where it is going:\
\
FIGURE SHOWING THE SCHEMATIC OF THE MODEL\
\
The parameter \\(\\epsilon\\), called the emissivity or the absorptivity, determines what fraction of infrared radiation coming from the surface is absorbed by the atmosphere. \
\
To derive the equations for this model we\'92ll need to balance energy going into and out of each component. So we balance all the radiation arrows going into and out of the surface and all the radiation arrows going into and out of the atmosphere. And let\'92s initially assume that \\(\\epsilon=1\\), that is, the atmosphere is a perfect blackbody and absorbs all the surface infrared radiation. Here\'92s the energy balance equation for the surface\
\
\\[\\frac\{S\}\{4\}(1-\\alpha) + \\sigma T^4_a = \\sigma T^4_s \\; , \\tag\{2\} \\]\
\
and for the atmosphere the equation is\
\
\\[\\sigma T^4_s=2\\sigma T^4_a \\; . \\tag\{3\}\\]\
\
If we look at the planet as a whole and ask how the energy going in is balanced with the energy coming out, with \\(\\epsilon=1\\) we have \
\
\\[\\frac\{S\}\{4\}(1-\\alpha)  = \\sigma T^4_a \\; . \\tag\{4\}\\]\
\
Notice that equation (4) is the same energy balance equation as our first model, equation (1). So our initial equation actually applies best to the energy balance at the top of the atmosphere. SAY SOMETHING ABOUT SKIN TEMPERATURE?\
\
We can now solve these equations for \\(T_a\\) and \\(T_s\\). We can use equation (4) for \\(T_a\\) and either substitute equation (4) or equation (3) into equation (2) to get an equation only in terms of \\(T_s\\),\
\
\\[T_a=(\\frac\{S\}\{4\\sigma\}(1-\\alpha))^\{1/4\} \\]\
\
\\[T_s=(\\frac\{S\}\{2\\sigma\}(1-\\alpha))^\{1/4\} \\; .\\]\
\
Using \\(S=1361 \\text\{W\}/\\text\{m\}^2\\) and \\(\\alpha = 0.31\\) we get \\(T_a=254\\, \\text\{K\}\\) and \\(T_s=302\\, \\text\{K\}\\). Our atmospheric temperature is the same as before but the surface temperature is now warmer: we now have a greenhouse effect! Though \\(302\\, \\text\{K\}\\) is too warm compared to the actual average temperature of the Earth \\(288\\, \\text\{K\}\\). The surface temperature is too warm because we are assuming with \\(\\epsilon=1\\) that the Earth\'92s atmosphere is a perfect blackbody, absorbing all the infrared radiation that hits it. In fact we know from observations that some of the infrared radiation emitted by the surface escapes to space, so let\'92s account for that. \
\
\'91Bohr model\'92 \
\
Instead of assuming that the atmosphere absorbs all the infrared radiation emitted by the ground, let\'92s assume that it absorbs just a fraction, \\(\\epsilon\\), of it, where \\(0 < \\epsilon < 1\\); thus, an amount \\((1-\\epsilon)\\sigma T^4_s\\) of surface radiation escapes to space (see the figure above). Similarly, we also assume that the atmosphere only emits an \\(\\epsilon\\) fraction of the amount it would do as a perfect blackbody. In all other ways the model is the same as above. If we follow the same process of balancing energy in with energy out for the surface and the atmosphere we get the following equations:\
\
\
\\[S/4(1-\\alpha)+\\epsilon T^4_a = \\sigma T^4_s \\; , \\]\
\
\\[S/4(1-\\alpha)=\\epsilon T^4_a + (1-\\epsilon)\\sigma T^4_s \\; . \\]\
\
Solving for these two equations for \\(T_s\\) we obtain\
\
\\[T_s=(\\frac\{S(1-\\alpha)\}\{2\\sigma(2-\\epsilon)\})^\{1/4\} \\; . \\]\
\
If \\(\\epsilon = 1\\), we recover our most recent greenhouse effect result with \\(T_s = 302 \\text\{K\}\\).  If \\(\\epsilon = 0\\), then the atmosphere has no radiative effect and, as in equation (1), we obtain \\(T_s = 255 \\text\{K\}\\). The real atmosphere is somewhere between these two extremes, and for \\(\\epsilon = 0.8\\), approximately similar to observations, we find \\(T_s = 288 \\text\{K\}\\). The real emissivity on Earth actually varies by location and to model Earth more accurately we would want spatial details and even more layers in our model atmosphere, but for such a simple model it does remarkably well. Global warming is analogous to increasing Earth\'92s emissivity in this model: by adding more \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) to the atmosphere we increase the amount of infrared radiation the atmosphere absorbs.\
\
=============================================\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa420\partightenfactor0
\cf0 Physics of Radiation Absorption and Emission\
So far we\'92ve used the physics of blackbody radiation to explain and model and the greenhouse effect. Insofar as the atmosphere behaves as a perfect blackbody with a smooth Planck emission spectrum, this level of description is enough. But the real atmosphere is more complicated, with big gaps missing in its emission spectrum. To illustrate this, let\'92s first look at the atmosphere of Mars. Mars\'92s atmosphere is 95% \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) and nearly all of the remaining gases do not really absorb much radiation at all. Mars is therefore a relatively simple atmosphere in which to see radiative effects. Here is how the emission spectrum of Mars (red line) compares to two Planck blackbody emission spectra (black dashed lines):\
MARS IR EMISSION FIGURE: This figure shows a summer-afternoon emission spectrum for Mars observed by the TES instrument on the <em>Mars Global Surveyor</em>.\
We can see that compared to the emission spectrum of a perfect blackbody, Mars is missing a big chunk of its emission centered at \\(667 \\text\{cm\}^\{-1\}\\) (corresponding to a wavelength of \\(15 \\mu \\text\{m\}\\). Because of Mars\'92 simple atmosphere we know this has to be due to the absorption of \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\). So the Sun is shining on the surface of Mars, which we know from observations is emitting like an almost perfect blackbody, but then as that radiation tries to escape to space, a big chunk is absorbed by \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) and is re-emitted back down to the surface. This re-emitted radiation mostly stays within the surface and atmosphere of Mars, warming the planet and giving it a small greenhouse effect. This effect is somewhat different than changing the bulk emissivity in our one-layer energy balance model; changing \\(\\epsilon\\) so that \\(0 < \\epsilon < 1\\) is like simply squashing down the whole Planck emission spectrum instead of removing a chunk of the spectrum like what actually happens. \
Let\'92s look now at the more complex emission spectrum of Earth (satellite observations in red, a complex atmospheric radiation model in blue):\
\
EARTH IR EMISSION FIGURE: caption: This figure compares a computed global-mean, annual-mean emission spectrum for Earth (blue) with observations from the satellite-borne AIRS instrument (red); both are superimposed over four Planck distributions. Arrows point to emission spikes in the middle of the main \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) and \\(\\text\{O\}_3\\) bands.\
Like Mars, Earth is missing a chunk of its spectrum centered at \\(667 \\text\{cm\}^\{-1\}\\) due to \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\). Yet Earth is missing additional chunks, with the primary atmospheric gases at fault labeled at the top of the graph (\\(text\{H\}_2\\text\{O\}, \\text\{CO\}_2, \\text\{O\}_3\\)).\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 What physics can explain these missing spectrum chunks? In short it\'92s because of the absorption of photons by gases in the atmosphere. Let\'92s look at specifically how this happens, starting with individual atoms. We\'92ll use the element Helium in particular. Like all atoms Helium is composed of a nucleus and electrons that orbit the nucleus and it looks something like this:\
\
FIG He atom: Helium is composed of two neutrons (n), two protons 
\f1 (p), and two electrons (e). The electrons have a negative electric charge, the protons have a positive electric charge, and the neutrons are neutral with no electric charge.
\f0 \
\
The nucleus of Helium contains two protons and two neutrons, which account for nearly all the mass of the atom. The two electrons of Helium are moving around the nucleus in very particular orbits. It turns out, due to the laws of quantum mechanics, that there are only a few specific orbits allowed around the atom. The orbits closer in are lower energy levels and orbits further out are higher energy levels. I have to note that I\'92ve drawn Helium using what\'92s called the Bohr model of the atom that looks like planets orbiting a star. In truth the electrons aren\'92t hard balls that zip around the nucleus but are more like a wavy-cloud that shifts its density around the nucleus. Yet the Bohr model is useful for illustrating how photons are absorbed and emitted by atoms:\
\
FIG: He atom absorbing and emitting photons, which are depicted by a wavy squiggled arrow. This illustration shows 5 energy levels though in actuality there are many more.\
\
We learned in the previous chapter that photons are packets of energy, the amount of which is determined by the frequency, \\(\\nu\\), of the photon \\(E=h\\nu\\). As we see in this above figure, if an electron absorbs a photon, the energy of the photon goes into jumping the electron into a higher energy level. A little strangely, the photon energy must be <em>precisely</em> the energy required for the jump. This implies that only photons of relatively few specific frequencies can be absorbed by a given atom; for this jump from energy level 1 to energy level 3 in the illustration, \\(E_3-E_1=h\\nu_\{1-3\}\\), where \\(\\nu_\{1-3\}\\) is the specific frequency of the photon for this situation. It\'92s a very similar process for photon <em>emission</em>: electrons move from a high energy level to a lower energy level by emitting a photon of precisely the right frequency to make up the difference in energy for the jump. Electrons prefer to be in the lowest energy level they can and will spontaneously emit photons to get there. But once an electron is in the lowest energy level surrounding the nucleus, an electron can\'92t emit photons anymore and it can only move up again by absorbing them. Notice also from the figure that electrons can jump up or down multiple energy levels as long as the right frequency of photon is involved (Note: Quantum mechanics does technically forbid very specific kinds of photon energy level jumps, but that\'92s not essential to know for our purposes here). This whole process explains why we only saw a few radiation peaks in the emission spectrum of galaxy NGC 6052 (below); the emission was coming from Hydrogen and Helium gases and they can only emit particular frequencies of photons.\
\
FIG: galaxy NGC 6052\
\
Besides absorption and emission of photons within individual atoms, it\'92s also possible for groups of atoms, called molecules, to collectively absorb and emit photons. The large majority of atmospheric gases are groups of either two or three atoms, called diatomic molecules and triatomic molecules; examples include \\(\\text\{O\}_2\\), diatomic, and \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\), triatomic. Like in atoms, the electrons in molecules shift around in a wavy-cloud of negative charge. In order for this electron cloud to absorb and emit photons its center of charge needs change speed or change direction. A molecule\'92s electron cloud can do this if the molecule as a whole rotates or vibrates in particular ways. Let\'92s look at some examples for diatomic and triatomic molecules:\
\
FIG: Molecular rotation and vibration modes. Protons are depicted using the symbol +. Electrons are illustrated with a \'91cloud\'92 surrounding the protons and by the symbol -. Photons being absorbed are illustrated by squiggly wave packet arrows. Non-squiggly arrows indicate the molecule stretching, rotating, or bending. Note that the triatomic rotation modes illustrated here also include a vibrational bending. Modified from Pierrehumbert, Principles of Planetary Climate, 2010.\
\
The top row of both the diatomic and triatomic molecules is the lowest energy state of the molecules. This is similar to when electrons are in the lowest energy level in an atom. The rows below that show the molecules absorbing photons and subsequently vibrating and rotating. Molecules are also able to vibrate and rotate at the same time, illustrated with the bending vibration in the triatomic \'91rotation\'92 column of the figure. \
\
Just like for atoms, a molecule <em>absorbs</em> a photon to go from a low energy state to a higher energy state and <em>emits</em> a photon to go from a high energy state to a lower energy state. For example, a triatomic molecule will emit a photon when it goes from a stretched-out high energy state to its lowest energy state. And also just like for atomic emission and absorption, the photon energy needs to be just the right amount for the molecule to vibrate or rotate in one of the limited number of ways that it is able to. For example, \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) is a triatomic molecule and its bending mode, illustrated in the \'91rotation\'92 column in the figure, absorbs photons with a wavelength of \\(15 \\mu \\text\{m\}\\), corresponding to the missing emission chunk centered on \\(667 \\text\{cm\}^\{-1\}\\) in the spectra of Mars and Earth that we saw previously; this particular bending of \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) is therefore responsible for almost the entire greenhouse effect on Mars and a large portion of the greenhouse effect on Earth (approximately 20%).\
\
The bending vibration mode of \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) is so important because it just so happens to overlap with an important section the blackbody emission spectrum of Earth. \\(\\text\{CO\}_2\\) has many atomic and molecular absorption energies, but just one of them really matters for Earth\'92s greenhouse effect. Whether a gas is radiatively important or not is entirely determined by this overlap between a gas\'92 photon absorption energies and a planet\'92s emission spectra. In general, atomic absorption requires the highest energy photons, followed by molecular vibration, followed by molecular rotation, see side Table. Since Earth, as well as many other planets, emits primarily infrared radiation, it turns out that vibrational and rotational modes of atmospheric gases dominate the greenhouse effect, see side Table.\
\
FIG: side note fig: Types of radiation absorbed by atomic or molecular transition type. An \'91electronic\'92 transition is equivalent to what I\'92ve been calling in this chapter \'91atomic\'92. Catling and Kasting, <em>Atmospheric Evolution on Inhabited and Lifeless Worlds</em>, (2017).\
\
=============================================\
\
One feature of the emission spectra we saw of Mars and Earth that we have not explained yet is why the missing emission chunks are so wide? All the explanations given so far for photon absorption have said that the physics of atoms and molecules allows only particular, individual electron energy states to exist. If atoms and molecules can only absorb photons of a few particular energies or frequencies, why do we see wide gaps in the emission spectra instead of narrow lines? Why doesn\'92t the emission spectra of Mars look like the green line I\'92ve drawn over the top of this figure?\
\
FIG: emission line of Mars\
\
Photon absorption is broadened over a wider range of energies due to two processes: Doppler broadening and pressure (or collision) broadening. Doppler broadening happens when gas molecules move relative to the source of radiation. Like the changing sound of a fast-moving car that passes us, the sound of the car has a higher pitch or frequency as it approaches us and then a lower pitch or frequency as it moves away. Similarly, the frequency of radiation that hits a moving molecule will be \'91Doppler shifted\'92: if the molecule is moving toward the photon that hits it, the frequency and energy will be increased by a small amount and if it\'92s moving away from the photon, the frequency and energy will be decreased. Pressure (or collision) broadening happens when collisions between molecules happen at the same time as photon absorption and some of the energy of the collision adds to or subtracts from the energy required for the photon absorption. \
\
The shape of the broadening from these two processes that we see in emission spectra (as in our Mars example above) follow what are called the Doppler and Lorentz line shapes:\
\
FIG: Doppler and Lorentz figure from Catling and Kasting caption: Doppler and Lorentz line shapes for equal widths and strengths, plotted as frequency change \\((\\nu-\\nu_0)\\) per width \\(\\alpha\\).\
\
Doppler and pressure broadening are absolutely essential for the greenhouse effect. Without these processes only a tiny fraction of the radiation energy could be absorbed by the atmosphere. Therefore the greenhouse effect wouldn\'92t exist at all(cite Catling and Kasting) and Earth would be a frozen and uninhabitable \\(T=254\\, \\text\{K\} \\approx -20 ^\{\\circ\}\\text\{C\}\\), as we calculated. \
\
Another fundamental question is why do we even have gaps in the emission spectra of planets at all? If an atmosphere can emit photons at the same energies that it absorbs them, why can\'92t the atmosphere just pass along the photons to outer space? Part of the answer has to do with the direction of emission: photon emission in a gas occurs in random directions (as shown in the illustrations), so it\'92s not possible to just convey the photons directly out to space. The other part of the answer is that there is a fundamental asymmetry between absorption and emission. If I shine the right kind of infrared photons on gas molecules, those molecules will readily absorb the photons. But then the gas molecules could use that energy to zoom around faster or they could end up transferring that energy to another molecule in a collision. This energy that goes into molecular movement not only heats up the gas but it also indirectly steals chunks out of the overall emission spectra of the atmosphere. This process is the greenhouse effect at work.\
\
=============================================\
\
So far we\'92ve discussed many of the physical pieces of the greenhouse effect. In this section we\'92ll put them together to see how the greenhouse effect changes the atmosphere and warms the surface. The energy balance model we developed at the beginning of this chapter showed us that an atmosphere that could absorb infrared radiation would end up warming the surface. This happens in the model because there\'92s an additional amount of radiation that goes to the surface that wouldn\'92t occur without the atmosphere; this is circled in orange:\
\
FIG: highlighted 1-layer model\
\
It\'92s fundamentally the same idea as what happens in the real atmosphere. To explore this, we\'92ll run a series of experiments using a complex model of atmospheric radiation called MODTRAN; this model compares very well to what we observe in the real atmosphere. \
\
If we start out with Earth\'92s atmosphere but no greenhouse gases (no carbon dioxide, no water vapor, no methane, etc.), its emission spectrum is just a smooth Planck spectrum originating from the surface of the Earth and left unchanged by the atmosphere.\
\
MAKE FIGURES THAT PROGRESSIVELY ADD ON EACH TIME SERIES UNTIL WE ARE LEFT WITH THE FINAL RESULT. MAYBE GRAY OUT PREVIOUS TIME SERIES? OR MUTE THEIR COLORS?\
\
FIG: Earth emission spectrum\
\
Notice that in this scenario the Earth\'92s surface is a cold 259 K. If we add CO2 into the atmosphere at 415 ppm (the average 2022 level) and no other greenhouse gases, we see the missing emission chunk at 667 cm-1 and a large reduction in the radiation emitted to space:\
\
FIG: only CO2 added\
\
Since the energy input from the Sun stays the same, the reduction in energy going out means energy will build up within the planet\'92s surface and atmosphere. This build up of energy can\'92t go on for very long since it would violate physics\'92 second law of thermodynamics. So the atmosphere warms and thus emits more radiation until it comes back into energy balance with what is coming in:\
\
FIG: CO2 + temperature adjustment to increase radiation\
\
Notice that this warming has shifted the emission distribution upward, reflective of its warmer blackbody temperature. If we now add in all of the greenhouse gases currently present in Earth\'92s atmosphere and let the temperature and outgoing radiation adjust, this is what we get:\
\
FIG: All GHG\
\
With the addition of even more greenhouse gases, we get an even larger increase in surface temperature in order to balance energy coming in to the Earth system with energy going out. This is the radiative impact of Earth\'92s greenhouse effect.\
\
Is it possible to completely saturate Earth\'92s atmosphere with greenhouse gases such that adding more won\'92t heat the surface of Earth? In these experiments we\'92ve progressively added more greenhouse gases to the atmosphere and we\'92ve seen that it simply radiatively adjusts: radiation in must balance radiation out and the temperature of the atmosphere warms to accomplish that. The atmosphere of Venus is 96.5% CO2 and has a mass 94 times greater than Earth\'92s atmosphere. It\'92s surface temperature is an unbearable 737 K = 464 C. Adding even more CO2 to Venus\'92 atmosphere would just make it hotter.\
\
 \'91continuum absorption\'92 \
\
\
DISCUSS PHYSICS OF PHOTON ABSORPTION AND EMISSION: ELECTRON ORBIT, VIBRATION, ROTATION. USE CATLING AND PIERREHUMBERT CH 4 TEXTS FOR GUIDANCE. USE ARCHER FIGURES TO EXPLAIN THE BAND SATURATION EFFECT AND LINE BROADENING. CATLING HAS FIGS FOR WHAT DOPPLER AND PRESSURE FUNCTIONS LOOK LIKE. THEN USE ARCHER FIG 4.8 FOR A SUMMARY OF THE GREENHOUSE EFFECT. MAYBE ALSO INCLUDE MANABE OR PIERREHUMBERT FIGS SHOWING GREENHOUSE EFFECT FROM A TEMPERATURE PROFILE PERSPECTIVE.\
\
\
Applet for molecular absorption (only vibrational modes): https://phet.colorado.edu/sims/html/molecules-and-light/latest/molecules-and-light_en.html\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
NEED TO DEFINE LONGWAVE AND SHORTWAVE RADIATION WHEN WE SHOW RADIATION FROM THE SUN VS FROM THE EARTH.\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
}