{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2709
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 IBMPlexSans-Regular;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww15360\viewh9000\viewkind0
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs36 \cf0 \
Climate Solutions\
\
\'91Solving\'92 Global Warming\
\
The task of completely solving global warming is hard for practical as well as psychological reasons. \
\
On the practical side, consider the materials that have been called \'91the four pillars of modern civilization\'92: ammonia, plastics, steel, and concrete.(Cite Smil) Ammonia (NH3) is used world-wide as a source of nitrogen to fertilize crops; without ammonia, world agricultural production would be half of what it currently is. But the production of ammonia through the \'91Haber-Bosch\'92 process is completely dependent on the greenhouse gas methane. Plastics are almost entirely derived from methane or crude oil. Steel is made by smelting iron ore with limestone and \'91coking\'92 coal. Concrete is produced by heating ground limestone and clay (or shale or other materials), which process releases large amounts of CO2. Additionally, all of these four materials are usually made by directly burning fossil fuels or through power plants that are run on fossil fuels. \
\
So we \'91eat\'92 fossil fuels and we make the world\'92s products, homes, and cities out of fossil fuels. World wide production of these \'91pillar\'92 materials are in the hundreds of millions to billions of tons.(Cite Smil) It is no easy task to fundamentally \'91decarbonize\'92 these essential materials by producing them in ways that do not emit greenhouse gases.\
\
From a psychological perspective, it would be challenging to create a problem that would be harder to solve than global warming. People respond best to threats that are local, that they can see, and that impact them immediately. But CO2 emitted in one place, goes into the global atmosphere. And CO2 is invisible and doesn\'92t have a smell or taste. Emitting CO2, by, for example, driving around in a normal car, doesn\'92t immediately and obviously impact your daily life. While some of the impacts are felt now, they will disproportionately affect future generations: we emit the CO2 now, but it\'92s our children and grandchildren who pay the biggest price. \
\
Given these challenges, I think it\'92s a tremendously bad idea to frame global warming as a problem that must to be completely solved. If it\'92s framed this way, people simply give up. But global warming is not an \'91all or nothing\'92 kind of problem! Even partial fixes will do good! And perhaps, in the process of making many partial fixes, we will end up actually \'91solving\'92 global warming.\
\
The Big Picture\
\
There are many people who believe that global warming could be solved if we did \'91just one particular thing\'92, with that particular thing being whatever they are personally passionate about. But the reality is that greenhouse gas emissions come from a huge variety of sources, and so addressing each particular source would be a partial fix of global warming.\
\
FIG: CO2 emissions\
\
Perhaps the most comprehensive collection of fixes that has been gathered together is produced by the organization \'91Project Drawdown\'92 ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://drawdown.org/"}}{\fldrslt https://drawdown.org}}). The video below presents their \'91Roadmap\'92 to reducing greenhouse gas emissions. It provides an excellent big picture view of the things that can most plausibly be done now to address global warming.\
\
 https://youtu.be/xSvQYMH3FJw\
\
How will these actions actually be accomplished? There are two general approaches that have been advocated for implementing these kinds of global warming fixes. I\'92ll call these two approaches the \'91United Nations approach\'92 and the \'91Hartwell approach\'92, named after the organizations that have most prominently advocated for them.\
\
The United Nations approach argues that \'91global\'92 warming must be addressed through global governance and policy. The aim of this approach is to bring as many nations as possible together to get them to agree to common, legally-binding climate policies. There have been many United Nations climate conferences since the mid-1990s. None of them has ended with a genuine, truly legally-binding breakthrough, though some have made important progress (such as the 2015 \'91Paris Agreement\'92).\
\
The Hartwell approach argues that the United Nations approach will ultimately fail because it treats global warming like an issue that can be fixed by policies. It argues that decarbonization will only happen indirectly and locally: organizations and local governments can fix immediate societal problems that have the 
\i additional
\i0  benefit of partially fixing global warming. An example of this would be the problem of air pollution due to burning coal: local governments should replace coal power plants with clean alternatives because the pollution from burning coal is killing people.\
\
You may have noticed that the video above didn\'92t specify who exactly would implement the different actions they proposed. They mention governments, investors, and individuals as potentially implementing these actions. \
\
I\'92m a pragmatist about all sorts of things in life and I\'92d be happy for either general approach to work or a mix of the two. My personal view is that it\'92s important to allow for and be aware of 
\i many
\i0  general approaches to fixing global warming. I don\'92t think we should be so single-minded and ideological about one general approach that we ignore others that can make real progress.\
\
\
Personal Action\
\
Do our individual actions matter? If you view global warming as a massive problem that will only be solved through UN-brokered global policies, then it\'92s hard to see how your individual actions will make a difference. But if instead you can see that global warming is really hundreds of smaller problems with many of these being fixable in one location at a time, then things look very different indeed. If you count up all the actions in the Project Drawdown list that individuals in relatively affluent countries have power over, this adds up to 25-30% of total greenhouse gas emissions ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.drawdown.org/news/insights/the-powerful-role-of-household-actions-in-solving-climate-change"}}{\fldrslt https://www.drawdown.org/news/insights/the-powerful-role-of-household-actions-in-solving-climate-change}}). That\'92s a big impact!\
\
So what can we do? Typical lists of individual actions that you can find online or in news articles are often a hodgepodge of the important and the irrelevant. Consider this typical list: never use a new plastic bag; change one standard lightbulb to a low-energy lightbulb; never leave your TV on standby; commute to work by bus instead of car; become vegetarian; make one fewer flight. But consider this: never using a new plastic bag will save 5 kg of CO2 per year but making one fewer flight will save 500-12,000 kg of CO2 per year (depending on the flight). These things are different by 2-4 orders of magnitude! So some of the things in this list really matter and others are, from a purely CO2 perspective, essentially irrelevant.\
\
The Breaking Boundaries organization has worked with Project Drawdown and other scientists to create a short list of things that people(That is, people in relatively affluent countries who are producing the vast majority of emissions.) can do to make a real difference. How much of a difference they will make depends in large part on how you live. I encourage you to go to their website({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://breakingboundaries.count-us-in.com/steps"}}{\fldrslt https://breakingboundaries.count-us-in.com/steps}}) and see what their impact would be for you.\
\
The Breaking Boundaries list is separated into four categories:\
\
Food\
Cut Food Waste: Buy only the food you know you\'92ll eat.\
Eat More Veggies: Replace meat with a flexitarian diet.\
\
Energy\
Switch to Clean Energy: Upgrade to renewable energy in your home.\
Insulate Your Home: Install or improve your home\'92s insulation.\
Save With LED Lights: Switch to energy-efficient LED light bulbs.\
\
Travel\
Drive Electric or Hybrid: Make your next car an electric or hybrid vehicle.\
Get Around Greener: Share a ride with others or travel by bike or foot instead.\
Fly Less: Stay local, make a video call or find another way to travel.\
\
Voice\
Make Your Money Count: Choose responsible financial institutions and funds.\
Talk to Friends: Talk about the planet\'92s boundaries and how to take a step.\
Spark Ideas at Work: Inspire your company to make changes that matter.\
Keep Politicians Accountable: Call on leaders to bring us back within planetary boundaries.\
Plant More Trees: Help the experts plant, protect, and restore our forests.\
\
Below I\'92ve made a plot of plausible lower and upper bounds on the monthly CO2 impact each action would take. As you can see, these vary a lot by person and by type. Note that you personally could have lower or higher CO2 emissions than the values that are plotted here; I just clicked through the options on the website that seemed to me to plausibly represent minimum and maximum values. \
\
Even though they are all relatively high impact, some are much higher impact than others.(Note that the lower bounds for the smallest actions, \'91Cut Food Waste\'92 and \'91Save With LED Lights\'92 are more than 10 times more important on an annual average than never using plastic bags. That\'92s of course not to say that you should use as many plastic bags as you can! There are very serious concerns about plastic pollution, but plastic bags just don\'92t make a big difference in CO2 emissions.) Also note that some personal choices, like where to live, can address two or more of these at once. For example, if you choose to live in an urban area and get around without a car, you will save significant amounts on travel emissions and home energy emissions because it takes less energy to heat or cool a relatively small apartment that shares walls with others, compared to a large free-standing home.\
\
\'91Planetary boundaries\'92 refers to the \'91safe operating space\'92 for nine planetary systems. Crossing certain biophysical thresholds of these systems could have disastrous consequences for humanity. Rockstr\'f6m, et al., A safe operating space for humanity, (2009).\
\
The last category of personal actions, \'91Voice\'92, is really important. There aren\'92t specific \'91kg of CO2 equivalent\'92 that are saved here, but this is the category of actions where your influence gets multiplied. Instead of just one person making a change, these are the things that can bring about change among your friends, your co-workers, your employer, and your region or country. Plant More Trees. Make Your Money Count. Talk to Friends. Spark Ideas at Work. Keep Politicians Accountable.\
\
\
Knowing and Doing\
\
As we all know, knowing what we ought to do is very different from actually doing it. \
\
I was once at a panel discussion in New York City on the topic of climate change. One of the panel members was a prominent journalist who had been among the first to write about climate change and global warming. In the introduction he was lauded by the moderator for all the articles and books he had written about climate change and the awards that he\'92d won. In the question and answer period at the end, a member of the audience asked him what he had personally changed in his life in response to climate change. He took a long pause and said, \'91I\'92m ashamed to admit that I\'92ve done nothing.\'92 \
\
While I know many climate scientists who have made significant changes in their life in response to the threat of global warming, over the years I have been surprised at the number of climate scientists who have changed little or nothing. I know a scientist who worked on the IPCC sixth assessment report who flies internationally for pleasure at least once a month and usually twice a month. He had recently bought a brand new gas-powered SUV and when I asked why he had not bought an electric vehicle, he said he could certainly afford it but that it was \'91too inconvenient\'92. \
\
I don\'92t fully understand why there\'92s such a complete disconnect for some people. <i>Can\'92t they at least do something?</i>, I sometimes wonder. Certainly it\'92s a general human problem to know what we ought to do, but to never manage to actually do it. Perhaps it\'92s just that making meaningful life changes is really hard. \
\
Accountability\
\
Here\'92s the most personal part of the book. It\'92s the part where I show some accountability, telling you, dear reader, what I have done and what I haven\'92t done about global warming. This is obviously a little unusual to do in a textbook. I do it in part for the selfish reason that it helps to keep me committed. I also do it because I believe that climate scientists would do more about global warming if they had public accountability and couldn\'92t hide behind their job titles. I also hope that it may encourage you, the reader, to do something about global warming too.\
\
This is what I have done and am currently doing: \
\
Food: \
\
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://ourworldindata.org/grapher/ghg-emissions-seafood"}}{\fldrslt https://ourworldindata.org/grapher/ghg-emissions-seafood}}\
\
Energy: I\'92ve always rented wherever I\'92ve lived so I haven\'92t been able to install solar power on my roof or install special insulation. Though since LED lights have become available, I\'92ve always had them. When I lived in New York City, the state made it possible for individuals to decide the source of their power, if it came from renewable sources or not. I elected to have renewable energy (which, by the way, did cost me more per month than fossil fuel energy). I wish this were an option where I currently live.\
\
Travel: The first car I ever bought was a hybrid, a Toyota Prius. I owned it for about 5 years and then decided to go car free. Though since I was maybe 7 years old or so, my primary transportation has been my bicycle. I love bicycles and I have ridden my bike to work through snow, rain, and sunshine. I also own a large cargo bike that I haul my groceries and kids in. It can carry 200 kg (and up to 4 kids!) and I\'92ve even gone camping with my kids by bike. My family\'92s car-free, walking and bicycle-based travel situation is made possible in large part because we have always made the decision to live in the parts of cities that are walkable and bikeable. This has probably cost us more money for rent, though we also save significant amounts by not owning and operating a car; it\'92s common for about 3 months\'92 worth of people\'92s annual wages to go to operating a car; the total cost of car ownership ends up being more than two times as much as people estimate it will(cite).\
\
I\'92ve always I bought my first car in graduate school\
\
This is what I\'92m not currently doing: \
\
Given that there are hundreds of things that one could do, this list could be pretty long. But if I focus on those things in the Breaking Boundaries list that I have control over, I definitely don\'92t do as much as I could in the \'91Voice\'92 category. I teach a university course on the science of global warming and I\'92m not shy about talking about the science of global warming with those I meet, but that\'92s about it. I haven\'92t been active politically on this issue. I haven\'92t contacted or pressured my political leaders. And I haven\'92t meaningfully sparked ideas at my work (a university).\
\
If you\'92ve stuck with me over the course of all this, you\'92ve come a long way and learned a lot about the science of global warming. Please keep reviewing the Orbit questions that you\'92ve learned in the book! A small amount of time spent reviewing will ensure that you never forget what you\'92ve learned. \
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
blue carbon - storage of carbon in the ocean - review paper macreadie 2021\
\
terrestrial carbon storage - nolan 2021 review paper\
\
\
}