{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2709
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 IBMPlexSerif-Regular;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 HelveticaNeue;\f2\fnil\fcharset0 HelveticaNeue-Italic;
\f3\fnil\fcharset0 HelveticaNeue-Bold;\f4\fnil\fcharset0 OpenSans-Regular;\f5\fnil\fcharset128 HiraginoSans-W3;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red26\green26\blue26;\red21\green22\blue23;\red255\green255\blue255;
\red8\green64\blue97;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c13333\c13333\c13333;\cssrgb\c10980\c11373\c11765;\cssrgb\c100000\c100000\c100000;
\cssrgb\c0\c32157\c45490;}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww17440\viewh10600\viewkind0
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs36 \cf0 \
Global Warming Risks\
\
There is No Planet B\
\
Big environmental problems come with high stakes. In a not-impossible worst-case scenario where the Earth is heated up to a moist or runaway greenhouse state (discussed in Chapter 8), we would then have caused the permanent collapse of life on Earth. While this is quite unlikely to occur (a 1 in 1000 chance over the next 100 years), it\'92s mere possibility shows that the stakes are high. We have the power to inadvertently ruin everything. \
\
Our power of planetary destruction does not come with a counter-balancing power of planetary creation. While many over the past several decades have discussed colonizing and \'91terraforming\'92 Mars, this is a dangerous fantasy. \
\
It\'92s dangerous because it can appear to absolve us of actually improving conditions on Earth. If we can just inhabit another planet, why bother fixing this one if it appears to be going very badly? \
\
And it\'92s a fantasy because it\'92s impossible to turn Mars into another version of Earth. \
\
It\'92s greenhouse effect is far too small to warm the surface up to Earth-like temperatures. And even if all of Mars\'92 polar CO2-ice caps were sublimated into its\'92 atmosphere and all of Mars\'92 carbonate rocks were intensively strip-mined and processed to release CO2, it\'92s atmosphere would still be two orders of magnitude too thin for Earth-like warmth.\
\
(
\f1\fs32 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Jakosky, B.M., Edwards, C.S. Inventory of CO
\fs24 2
\fs32  available for terraforming Mars. 
\f2\i Nat Astron
\f1\i0  
\f3\b 2
\f1\b0 , 634\'96639 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41550-018-0529-6
\f0\fs36 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 ). Mars is also missing plate tectonics and any substantial amounts of water, and thus it is impossible for it to have a weathering-CO2 thermostat like Earth; this means that Mars could never stabilize its temperature over geological time scales. The very best that human life could ever be on Mars would be like the lives of small groups of scientists near the South Pole: cold, harsh, restricted, and lonely.\
\
So if, through a combination of very poor decision making and very bad luck, we manage to ruin things on Earth, there is no planet B. \
\
\
Global Warming Projections\
\
How do we know what we know about global warming? Ultimately all knowledge about any scientific area comes from the work of scientists working mostly in teams or small groups. This scientific knowledge is conveyed through articles written by the scientists. The field of climate science is unusual in that it also works collectively through large organizations that coordinate and plan research work and experiments. The largest of these is the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, most often called \'91the IPCC\'92. The following video explains more about the IPCC and interviews a number of scientists who have worked on the IPCC.\
\
Video: IPCC\
\
The IPCC has so far generated a new report every 5-7 years since 1990. The latest \'91Sixth Assessment Report\'92 was released in late 2021. These reports have helped to coordinate a huge amount of research work, especially the coordination of a series of model simulations. This coordination is particularly valuable because of the complexity of the problems and global climate models involved. \
\
To understand the value of this coordination, let\'92s look at a realistic example. Imagine there\'92s a small group of 2-4 scientists working together to estimate the impacts of global warming. Typically, such scientists would only have 3 years to work on this project (the usual length of research grants that pay for computing time and student or postdoc or research scientist salaries). The most this group of scientists would be able to do in three years is run a few climate model simulations and do statistical analyses of these results. They likely would not be able to run simulations from more than one or two different climate models and they would have to choose their own simple future scenarios. Because of these limitations their results will likely be highly dependent on the model (or models) and scenario they chose. This means that their conclusions will be fairly limited and not necessarily comparable to other groups of scientists who will be running their own models and their own scenarios for the future. The coordination of the IPCC allows many scientists to agree to a selection of future global warming scenarios and agree to run the same sets of experiments. Thus dozens of groups of scientists can run many dozens of model simulations, all with the same experimental inputs, though using different models. The output of these simulations is then collected together and hosted online so that thousands of climate scientists from all over the world can analyze these standardized model simulations. This means that the results of global warming simulation experiments can be comparable and generalizable and usable by a large number of people. An additional benefit of coordination like this is that the average of many different models is almost always more realistic than any individual model (this is generally true for models across all disciplines of science). Using a broad range of models can therefore give us a sense of what results are most reliable across models.\
\
What are the agreed-upon global warming scenarios? As of the Sixth Assessment Report of the IPCC, released in 2021, there are five general scenarios, each of which comes with its own economic and political narrative. These are called the Shared Socioeconomic Pathways (SSP). The SSPs span a wide range of possible futures. The CO2 emissions of each of these is show below along with an estimate of global mean temperature from a simple climate model.\
\
FIG: SSP CO2 emissions scenarios from: Hausfather, Z. Explainer: How \'91Shared Socioeconomic Pathways\'92 explore future climate change. Carbon Brief (19 April 2018)\
\
These narratives describe alternative pathways for future society. SSP1 and SSP5 envision optimistic trends for human development, with \'91substantial investments in education and health, rapid economic growth, and well-functioning institutions\'92. They differ in that SSP5 assumes this will be driven by an energy-intensive, fossil fuel-based economy, while in SSP1 there\'92s a shift toward sustainable practices. SSP3 and SSP4 are more pessimistic in their future economic and social development. These scenarios have little investment in education or health in poorer countries where there are also fast-growing populations and increasing inequality. SSP2 represents a \'91middle of the road\'92 scenario where historical patterns of development are continued throughout the 21st century.\
\
The IPCC report doesn\'92t say that any particular scenario is more or less likely than any another. Independent analyses have indicated that the middle scenarios (SSP2, SSP3, SSP4) are unsurprisingly the most probable. But there are still good economic reasons to not dismiss the low- and high-end scenarios, SSP1 and SSP5; in one study, subjective economic expert forecasts have suggested that there\'92s a 35% chance that the real future emissions scenario could exceed the most severe SSP5 scenario. cite:Christensen, Gillingham, and Nordhaus, 'Uncertainty in forecasts of long-run economic growth', (2018). But as Niels Bohr famously quipped, \'91Prediction is very difficult, especially about the future.\'92 \
\
In addition to the baseline SSP scenarios, there are also variations on the SSP scenarios that correspond to specific amounts of total radiative forcing by 2100: a range of values from 8.5 W/m^2 to 1.9 W/m^2. For example, if a scenario is labeled \'91SSP2-4.5\'92, this means SSP scenario 2 with 4.5 W/m^2 of radiative forcing (a global radiative imbalance) due to greenhouse gas emissions by 2100. In this and the next chapter you will see figures labeled with such scenarios.\
\
Yet another way of showing the results of different scenarios is to show the climate impacts due to a certain amount of global mean temperature warming. For example, the figure below shows what the average patterns of temperature and precipitation will be for a 1.5\'baC warming and a 3.0\'baC warming. For figures like these, different combinations of SSP scenarios can lead to a particular amount of warming (some scenarios with some climate models arrive at a particular warming sooner in the future than others). So while figures like the one below don\'92t tell you anything about particular SSP scenarios, they do have the advantage of simplicity; instead of keeping five different scenarios each with their own variations in mind, you can look at the climate impacts for one or two (or maybe more) global mean temperature values.\
\
FIG: ipcc-ar6-t-pcp-spatial-changes-1-3C.png Surface warming and precipitation change are shown relative to the 1850\'961900 climate, and for time periods over which the globally averaged surface warming is 1.5\'b0C (top) and 3\'b0C (bottom), respectively. Changes presented here are based on 31 CMIP6 models. From: IPCC, AR6, Ch. 4.\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
Sea Level Rise\
\
While the economic risks of global warming are very hard to estimate, the climate system is governed by more predictable laws of physics, chemistry, and biology. And probably the most commonly known physical impact of global warming is sea level rise. \
\
Sea level, like temperature, has been remarkably stable over the course of human civilization. Consider this perspective from the past 20,000 years:\
\
FIG: sea-level-rise-20ka.png Adapted from: Clark et al., <i>\AppleTypeServices\AppleTypeServicesF65539 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Consequences of twenty-first-century policy for multi-millennial climate and sea-level change</i>, (2016).\
\
Sea level was about 120 m lower during the last ice age. But from the time that agriculture began, animals were domesticated, and civilizations were constructed, sea level has been very stable. The problem is that we are not like our ancient ancestors, living in small groups of highly mobile hunter gatherers. In comparison, our cities are immensely populous and their form and boundaries are practically permanent. When the ice sheets of the last ice age melted away from about 20,000 years ago to 7,000 years ago, it caused an average sea level rise of 1 cm/year. Our hunter-gatherer ancestors would have been unlikely to have even noticed this kind of a change. But for a large coastal modern city this kind of sea level rise would end up being disastrous. \
\
What causes sea level rise? The two most important factors are the melting of ice on land and the expansion of ocean water as it is heated. Since 1900, the melting of ice on land has contributed twice as much to sea level rise than thermal expansion.cite:
\f1\fs32 \AppleTypeServices Frederikse, T., Landerer, F., Caron, L. 
\f2\i et al.
\f1\i0  The causes of sea-level rise since 1900. 
\f2\i Nature
\f1\i0  
\f3\b 584, 
\f1\b0 393\'96397 (2020)
\f0\fs36 \AppleTypeServices\AppleTypeServicesF65539   Note that the melting of floating sea ice contributes only a tiny amount to sea level rise. According to Archimedes\'92 Principle, a floating object displaces the same volume of water as the volume of the part of the object that\'92s submerged. So removing a boat from the ocean doesn\'92t change the ocean\'92s height. The subtle trick with sea ice is that by melting it into the ocean it changes the average density and therefore the volume of the ocean&mdash;but this effect is small and Archimedes\'92 Principle dominates the consequences of melting sea ice.
\f4\fs28 \AppleTypeServices \cf3 \cb4 Jenkins, A., and Holland, D. (2007), Melting of floating ice and sea level rise, 
\i Geophys. Res. Lett.
\i0 , 34, L16609, doi:{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://doi.org/10.1029/2007GL030784"}}{\fldrslt \cf5 10.1029/2007GL030784}}.
\f0\fs36 \AppleTypeServices\AppleTypeServicesF65539 \cf2 \cb1   \AppleTypeServices \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\
How is sea level projected to change under global warming? Ice melts and the ocean warms, so the sea level will rise. Uncertainty in how much it will rise comes from how much greenhouse gases we will emit and how Greenland and Antarctica\'92s ice sheets respond to warming. Depending on the SSP scenario, sea level rise by 2150 could be anywhere between about 0.5 m to 1.5 m, see figure below. But if there were a collapse of large ice sheets, particularly the West Antarctic Ice Sheet, then sea level could rise by about 3-6 m by 2150 with many more meters of sea level rise guaranteed to come after that.
\f1\fs32 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
DeConto, R.M., Pollard, D., Alley, R.B. 
\f2\i et al.
\f1\i0  The Paris Climate Agreement and future sea-level rise from Antarctica. 
\f2\i Nature
\f1\i0  
\f3\b 593, 
\f1\b0 83\'9689 (2021).
\f0\fs36 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\
FIG: sea-level-rise-projections.png Projections of sea level rise. Adapted from: IPCC, AR6, Technical Summary, (2021). \
\
How could a collapse of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet happen and why would it be so impactful? The following video very nicely explains the key ideas.\
\
WAIS collapse: https://youtu.be/t4oj7gwkRbc\
\
Let\'92s return back to the long-view of sea level rise that we began this section with. Sea level has been remarkably stable for thousands of years. How will it change in the coming few thousands of years? We\'92ve learned that because of the relatively slow weathering-CO2 thermostat, extra CO2 will remain in the atmosphere for hundreds of thousands of years, so it can continue to have an impact far into the future. Ice sheets also respond very slowly to temperature changes and can continue to melt for many hundreds of years even though the warming may have ceased. Depending on how much carbon we burn, from approximately all known usable fossil fuels down to about \'bc of all fossil fuels, the eventual sea level rise will be between about 25-50 m (figure below). \
\
FIG: long-term-future-sea-level-rise.png  Adapted from: Clark et al., <i>\AppleTypeServices\AppleTypeServicesF65539 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Consequences of twenty-first-century policy for multi-millennial climate and sea-level change</i>, (2016).\
\
Twenty-five meters of sea level rise is enough to bury all or significant portions of many of the world\'92s largest major cities, see figure below. Unless we keep the majority of the usable fossil fuels in the ground, we will have to eventually abandon or massively engineer nearly all of the world\'92s coastal cities.\
\
\AppleTypeServices \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 FIG: submerged-countries-clark2016.webp The maps show areas of submergence (purple) for countries with at least 50 million people living on land affected by long-term sea-level projection based on the 1280 Gton C emission scenario. Clark et al., <i>\AppleTypeServices\AppleTypeServicesF65539 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Consequences of twenty-first-century policy for multi-millennial climate and sea-level change</i>, (2016).\AppleTypeServices \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\
\
Heat and Humidity\
\
As Earth\'92s average temperature increases, you shift the distributions of what are \'91normal\'92 temperatures. As the distributions shift to warmer temperatures with time, we can see in the figure below that temperatures that were extremely warm in the past will become average or even cold in the future.\
\
FIG: Temp distributions\
\
Extreme warmth can have many kinds of impacts, such as on food crops (discussed below). For high temperatures to directly kill people, they usually have to be accompanied by high humidity. Why is this the case? It has to do with how the body gets rid of heat. If the human body did not get rid of the heat it generates, then it would warm by 1\'baC per hour until it cooked itself from the inside and died. As long as we have access to water and can sweat, we can work in dry-heat conditions up to about 50\'baC. The key mechanism that lets us endure this is our ability to loose heat through evaporation. When we sweat, the excess heat we produce can go into heating and evaporating the water on our skin; this removes heat from our bodies and we cool down. The figure below shows the energy balance of the human body while working or exercising. Evaporation can remove about 75% of the excess heat we produce (though only 25% when we are at rest).\
\
FIG: Buzan figure\
\
However this evaporative heating loss can be stopped if we experience humid or moist heat. If the air becomes too hot and too humid, we can no longer lose heat through evaporation and we risk heating up our bodies until they die.\
\
As an example of how this could affect us in the future, let\'92s look at the cities of Jakarta (Indonesia) and New York City (USA). Currently there are relatively few days per year that are hot enough to directly cause death in these cities. But if we use a combination of historical heat wave data and climate model simulations of global warming, then both these cities see very large increases in the number of deadly heat days. The figure below shows the results from a single model simulation for the year 2005 and the year 2100 under three different CO2 emissions scenarios; RCP 2.6 represents a low-emissions scenario, RCP 4.5 a middle of the road scenario, and RCP 8.5 a high-emissions scenario. What is plotted in the figure are all the days of the year, connected in time by lines, for the years 2005 and 2100. The red line indicates the threshold of temperature and humidity that cause death (values on the right side of the red line are deadly).\
\
FIG: Deadly heat Jakarta & NYC\
\
By 2100 in the middle of the road scenario, New York City will have about a month\'92s worth of deadly heat days while about 75% of Jakarta\'92s annual days will be hot enough to kill. If we look at this same analysis but using many different climate models, we see that by 2100 most of the tropics will experience deadly heat for a majority of the year. \
\
FIG: Spatial analysis of deadly heat\
\
These tropical regions are home to a large fraction of the human population. Depending on the emissions scenario, by 2100 between about 48% to 74% of the world\'92s population will experience more than 20 days of deadly heat per year.\
\
\
Two constraints of acclimatization period and moist-heat thresholds.\
\
FIG: human energy balance\
\
Heat wave impacts: 2003 European & 2010 Russia/Eastern Europe\
\
Impacts of heat waves more than death: crime, conflict, reduced labor productivity\
\
Benefits of fewer cold days do not cancel out the harm of increased hot extremes (Huber et al. 2017)\
\
MAKE BULLET POINT IDEAS FROM BUZAN AND HUBER PAPER AND ORGANIZE THEM TO PRESENT IN CHAPTER; ALSO INCORPORATE BATTISTI AND NAYLOR PAPER IDEAS, MAYBE AT THE BEGINNING? OR AS PART OF THE DISCUSSION OF HEAT SHIFTS?\
\
\
Destructive Storms\
\
https://youtu.be/d_P7WmFHOho\
\
\
Water \
\
\
With global warming, the projected changes in precipitation will be more complex than they will be for temperature. The figure below shows what the changes will look like for average precipitation versus daily extreme precipitation, for the case of 4\'baC of global mean temperature warming. \
\
FIG: IPCC temperature fig: Seneviratne, et al., Weather and Climate Extreme Events in a Changing Climate. In Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, (2021).\
\
Average precipitation increases in the tropics and the regions near the poles, while it decreases in many areas that are in-between. But if you look at daily extreme precipitation events, these get wetter nearly everywhere. But also consider soil moisture in the figure below: soils get drier nearly everywhere for every global warming scenario! This is because increasing temperature increases evaporation, thus drying out the soils.\
\
FIG: 
\f4\fs24 \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Annual average, multi-model ensemble mean changes (z-score) in surface soil moisture for 2071\'962100, using a 1985\'962014 baseline. Areas where changes are not robust are indicated by hatching. Note that soil moisture increases in Argentina, central and northern Africa, and western India are due to large increases in monsoon precipitation in those regions.
\f0\fs36 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\
The moisture of soil is determined by a competition between precipitation and evaporation. Even if precipitation increases, evaporation could increase even more than precipitation, thus leading to drier soil. This explains the drying soils in most locations on Earth in the above figure.\
\
How does all of this relate to droughts? Droughts are usually determined by soil moisture. So if the soil moisture is low for a long period of time, that constitutes a drought. Because soil moisture decreases in most locations, that means that there will be an increase of droughts in most locations on Earth. (cite IPCC chapter)\
\
Consider an example of a contemporary \'91megadrought\'92 in the North American Southwest. The figure below compares a megadrought from 2000 to 2021 (red line) to soil moisture from the driest 22 years periods over the past 1,200 years (light colored lines). This contemporary megadrought clearly stands out as among the very worst. The blue line in the figure shows what the drought would have been like without the influence of global warming. Global warming has taken what would have been an average severe drought and turned it into one of the worst in over a thousand years. (cite Williams paper)\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa320\partightenfactor0

\f1\fs32 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Williams, Cook, and Smerdon, Rapid intensification of the emerging southwestern North American megadrought in 2020\'962021, (2022).
\f0\fs36 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
FOOD\
\
\
- crop yield as a function of T (fig from Tigchelaar et al. 2018)\
- decline in wheat and maize yields\
- CO2 fertilization effect: discuss idea with images, then field experiments showing reduced nutrient content of foods\
- challenge of feeding a growing global population given yield reduction and increased yield variance\
\
The yield of food crops depends on both soil moisture and temperature. Though it turns out that temperature changes are usually more important for crops than soil moisture changes; this is because global warming affects extreme temperatures more easily than it does extreme precipitation. It\'92s also very hard to breed plants for extreme heat tolerance, so they are more vulnerable to hot temperatures.\
\
Plants have a fundamental range of temperatures that they prefer to live in and if that range is exceeded, the plants will produce less or even die. The figure below shows how crop yields, in general, are related to temperature (gray line). Very low temperatures make crops/plants grow slowly or incompletely, producing a very low yield. The yield then increases with increasing temperature. But once the temperature becomes too warm, the yield dramatically drops and will go to zero when the plants die. Across several different kinds of experiments, it has been shown that for every degree Celsius of warming above the current average temperatures, crop yields decrease on average about 6.0% for wheat, 3.2% for rice, 7.4% for maize, and 3.1% for soybeans. Zhao, Chuang, et al. "Temperature increase reduces global yields of major crops in four independent estimates\'94, (2017).\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf0 FIG: Schematic representation of temperature-yield relationship. In the absence of breeding for heat tolerance, an increase in mean temperature beyond the optimum temperature (
\f5 \uc0\u9830 
\f0 ) will lead to a decrease in mean yield and an increase in yield variability, assuming interannual temperature variability stays the same.\
\
The figure also shows two example scenarios: a \'91current\'92 annual temperature range (blue) that produces yields that are close to \'91optimal\'92 and another \'91future\'92 scenario (red) where the mean temperature increases such that the yield may be near optimal some years, but very low in other years. The range of year-to-year variability in the blue \'91current\'92 scenario is relatively small, while it is very large in the red \'91future\'92 scenario. More yield variability or volatility can cause extensive problems for both farmers and consumers. Without relatively consistent yields, farms would collapse and there would be significant food shortages. Because global warming is happening everywhere, this increases yield volatility everywhere and it increases the likelihood that multiple places could simultaneously experience crop failure.\
\
- discuss mean yield changes per deg C cited in tigchelaar paper for 4 major crops; cite yield loses based on observations; show maize yield figure for tigchelaar and cite mean value ranges for four largest producing countries\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf0 A common argument that is made about global warming and crops is that increasing CO2 will actually bring net benefits to crops. This argument is founded on the fact that the cellular structure of plants is predominantly made out of carbon and plants get this carbon from CO2 in the atmosphere (not carbon from the soil). So increasing CO2 increases the availability of carbon to plants, thus making them grow better. You can see this effect in the experiments, such as those shown in the figure below where a variety of rice and a variety of grass are grown at different levels of CO2 while holding everything else constant. \
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
FIG: CO2 effect in plants: Growth of 21-day-old rice and Setaria viridis seedlings at different ambient CO2 concentrations ranging from 30 to 800 parts per million. von Caemmerer et al. , <i>The Development of C4 Rice: Current Progress and Future Challenges</i>, (2012).\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf0 Clearly more CO2 makes the plants greener and leafier. But how does this impact crop yields and nutrients, the quantities that we humans actually care about? This can be tested in the lab as well as out in fields where CO2 is constantly pumped out over crops.\
\
FIG: An experimental rice field near Tsukuba, Japan, testing the effects of increased carbon dioxide. Toshihiro Hasegawa/National Agriculture and Food Research Organization of Japan.\
\
If only CO2 is increased, yields generally increase. However, yield increases vary quite a lot by country or region and crop type, anywhere from 2-24%.(McGrath, Justin M., and David B. Lobell. "Regional disparities in the CO2 fertilization effect and implications for crop yields." Environmental Research Letters 8.1 (2013): 014054.) What about nutrition changes? The figure below shows the average change in nutrients of different crops across 143 total field experiments like the one shown above. You can see that nearly all crop types become less nutritious with increasing CO2.\
\
FIG: Percentage change in nutrients of major crop types at elevated CO2 (approximately 550 ppm) compared to early 2010s atmospheric CO2 (approximately 390 ppm). \'91Zn\'92 is Zinc and \'91Fe\'92 is Iron. Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals of the estimates. Myers, et al., <i>Increasing CO2 threatens human nutrition</i>, (2014).\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
So how are crops affected if we put the major factors together: CO2 increases plus temperature increases plus drought increases? Crop nutrients clearly go down. If CO2-driven temperature changes can remain mostly within a crop\'92s optimal growing conditions, then CO2 fertilization can make temperature-caused yield losses to be about half as bad as they might otherwise have been.(Rosenzweig, Cynthia, et al. "Assessing agricultural risks of climate change in the 21st century in a global gridded crop model intercomparison." Proceedings of the national academy of sciences 111.9 (2014): 3268-3273.) But if drought and temperature extremes increase enough, the plants will die and no amount of CO2 change that. \
\
\
Economic Risk\
\
So far we\'92ve covered some of the most important physical impacts of global warming. There are many, many others that could also be discussed. An economic perspective tries to reduce most of these impacts down to a dollar amount or to a percentage of global gross domestic product (GDP). It\'92s a limited frame of reference to see the world only in terms of its monetary value. Yet this is still an important frame of reference to view the impacts of global warming from.\
\
Estimating the economic impacts of global warming is incredibly challenging. The entire global economy in all its complexity must be modeled according to a relatively small set of mathematical equations. And because the global economy is not a physical or chemical system, every equation in the economic model is parameterized (just like how some equations in a global climate model must also be \'91parameterized\'92 because they are too small or complex to model directly). The largest source of uncertainty in these economic models usually comes from estimating the model parameters. \
\
The economic impacts of global warming will also depend on the amount of greenhouse gases we emit and on Earth\'92s true climate sensitivity. Recall that climate sensitivity is defined as the global mean temperature response to a doubling of CO2. It is reasonable to expect that we will eventually emit more than a doubling of CO2; for the SSP \'91middle of the road\'92 scenario, CO2 levels will eventually reach about 700 ppm. Also recall that when accounting for uncertainties, the estimate of climate sensitivity is a fat-tailed distribution, skewed towards the higher values. So the temperature change for an eventual CO2 level of 700 ppm would be given by the following distribution.\
\
FIG: climate sensivity for 700 ppm emissions; \
\
Because the distribution is fat-tailed, the highest values can\'92t be ruled out. For example, there\'92s a 10% chance that the Earth will warm by more than 6\'baC (as indicated on the figure), which is more than double the most likely estimate. A 10% chance might feel unlikely, but many personal catastrophes that we spend a lot of effort and money to insure against are far less probable. A truly rational response to global warming ought to take very seriously the possibility of \'91unlikely\'92 extreme warming.\
\
The figure below shows the results of one prominent approach to estimating the economic impacts of global warming for a range of global warming scenarios: RCPs 2.6, 4.5, 6.0, and 8.5 for the year 2049 and the year 2099. The figure shows the change in global per capita GDP as a function of temperature, relative to a world without warming. So, for example, a 2\'baC warming by 2099 would mean that the world will lose about 10 to 22% of its total economic value by 2099.\
\
FIG: Burke 2018 \'91Paris Agreement NDCs\'92\
\
Note that different economic modeling approaches give different ranges of results. The first such economic models estimated GDP loses of 2-10% by 2100; but these models were simplistic and didn\'92t account for things like the changes in the frequency and severity of natural catastrophes and they also didn\'92t account for the uncertainties we\'92ve discussed very well (or at all).<label for="ref1" class="margin-toggle sidenote-number"></label><input type="checkbox" id="ref1" class="margin-toggle"/><span class="sidenote">Wagner and Weitzman, <i>Climate Shock: The Economic Consequences of a Hotter Planet</i>, (2015).</span> Most recent economic modeling gives results that are approximately consistent with the results shown in the figure above.<label for="ref1" class="margin-toggle sidenote-number"></label><input type="checkbox" id="ref1" class="margin-toggle"/><span class="sidenote">For example the reinsurance company Swiss Re uses a different modeling approach and estimates a global GDP loss of about 1.5-11% for a 2\'baC warming by 2049, while Burke et al.\'92s estimate is about 3-8%. Guo, Kubli, Saner, <i>The Economics of Climate Change: No Action is Not an Option</i>, (2021).</span> Though all current approaches do not account for unprecedented \'91tipping points\'92 such as the partial collapse of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet or the collapse of a particular biosphere. \
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
}